
#### 8.2.1.9 Outer Join Simplification

Table expressions in the `FROM` clause of a query are simplified in many cases.

At the parser stage, queries with right outer join operations are converted to equivalent queries containing only left join operations. In the general case, the conversion is performed such that this right join:

```sql
(T1, ...) RIGHT JOIN (T2, ...) ON P(T1, ..., T2, ...)
```

Becomes this equivalent left join:

```sql
(T2, ...) LEFT JOIN (T1, ...) ON P(T1, ..., T2, ...)
```

All inner join expressions of the form `T1 INNER JOIN T2 ON P(T1,T2)` are replaced by the list `T1,T2`, `P(T1,T2)` being joined as a conjunct to the `WHERE` condition (or to the join condition of the embedding join, if there is any).

When the optimizer evaluates plans for outer join operations, it takes into consideration only plans where, for each such operation, the outer tables are accessed before the inner tables. The optimizer choices are limited because only such plans enable outer joins to be executed using the nested-loop algorithm.

Consider a query of this form, where `R(T2)` greatly narrows the number of matching rows from table `T2`:

```sql
SELECT * T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON P1(T1,T2)
  WHERE P(T1,T2) AND R(T2)
```

If the query is executed as written, the optimizer has no choice but to access the less-restricted table `T1` before the more-restricted table `T2`, which may produce a very inefficient execution plan.

Instead, MySQL converts the query to a query with no outer join operation if the `WHERE` condition is null-rejected. (That is, it converts the outer join to an inner join.) A condition is said to be null-rejected for an outer join operation if it evaluates to `FALSE` or `UNKNOWN` for any `NULL`-complemented row generated for the operation.



Thus, for this outer join:

```sql
T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T1.A=T2.A
```

Conditions such as these are null-rejected because they cannot be true for any `NULL`-complemented row (with `T2` columns set to `NULL`):

```sql
T2.B IS NOT NULL
T2.B > 3
T2.C <= T1.C
T2.B < 2 OR T2.C > 1
```

Conditions such as these are not null-rejected because they might be true for a `NULL`-complemented row:

```sql
T2.B IS NULL
T1.B < 3 OR T2.B IS NOT NULL
T1.B < 3 OR T2.B > 3
```

The general rules for checking whether a condition is null-rejected for an outer join operation are simple:

- It is of the form `A IS NOT NULL`, where `A` is an attribute of any of the inner tables
- It is a predicate containing a reference to an inner table that evaluates to `UNKNOWN` when one of its arguments is `NULL`
- It is a conjunction containing a null-rejected condition as a conjunct
- It is a disjunction of null-rejected conditions

A condition can be null-rejected for one outer join operation in a query and not null-rejected for another. In this query, the `WHERE` condition is null-rejected for the second outer join operation but is not null-rejected for the first one:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T2.A=T1.A
                 LEFT JOIN T3 ON T3.B=T1.B
  WHERE T3.C > 0
```

If the `WHERE` condition is null-rejected for an outer join operation in a query, the outer join operation is replaced by an inner join operation.

For example, in the preceding query, the second outer join is null-rejected and can be replaced by an inner join:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T2.A=T1.A
                 INNER JOIN T3 ON T3.B=T1.B
  WHERE T3.C > 0
```

For the original query, the optimizer evaluates only plans compatible with the single table-access order `T1,T2,T3`. For the rewritten query, it additionally considers the access order `T3,T1,T2`.

A conversion of one outer join operation may trigger a conversion of another. Thus, the query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T2.A=T1.A
                 LEFT JOIN T3 ON T3.B=T2.B
  WHERE T3.C > 0
```

Is first converted to the query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T2.A=T1.A
                 INNER JOIN T3 ON T3.B=T2.B
  WHERE T3.C > 0
```

Which is equivalent to the query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM (T1 LEFT JOIN T2 ON T2.A=T1.A), T3
  WHERE T3.C > 0 AND T3.B=T2.B
```

The remaining outer join operation can also be replaced by an inner join because the condition `T3.B=T2.B` is null-rejected. This results in a query with no outer joins at all:

```sql
SELECT * FROM (T1 INNER JOIN T2 ON T2.A=T1.A), T3
  WHERE T3.C > 0 AND T3.B=T2.B
```

Sometimes the optimizer succeeds in replacing an embedded outer join operation, but cannot convert the embedding outer join. The following query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN
              (T2 LEFT JOIN T3 ON T3.B=T2.B)
              ON T2.A=T1.A
  WHERE T3.C > 0
```

Is converted to:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN
              (T2 INNER JOIN T3 ON T3.B=T2.B)
              ON T2.A=T1.A
  WHERE T3.C > 0
```

That can be rewritten only to the form still containing the embedding outer join operation:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN
              (T2,T3)
              ON (T2.A=T1.A AND T3.B=T2.B)
  WHERE T3.C > 0
```

Any attempt to convert an embedded outer join operation in a query must take into account the join condition for the embedding outer join together with the `WHERE` condition. In this query, the `WHERE` condition is not null-rejected for the embedded outer join, but the join condition of the embedding outer join `T2.A=T1.A AND T3.C=T1.C` is null-rejected:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN
              (T2 LEFT JOIN T3 ON T3.B=T2.B)
              ON T2.A=T1.A AND T3.C=T1.C
  WHERE T3.D > 0 OR T1.D > 0
```

Consequently, the query can be converted to:

```sql
SELECT * FROM T1 LEFT JOIN
              (T2, T3)
              ON T2.A=T1.A AND T3.C=T1.C AND T3.B=T2.B
  WHERE T3.D > 0 OR T1.D > 0
```
