

#### 8.2.1.8 Outer Join Optimization



Outer joins include `LEFT JOIN` and `RIGHT JOIN`.

MySQL implements an `*`A`* LEFT JOIN *`B`* *`join_specification`*` as follows:

- Table *`B`* is set to depend on table *`A`* and all tables on which *`A`* depends.
- Table *`A`* is set to depend on all tables (except *`B`*) that are used in the `LEFT JOIN` condition.
- The `LEFT JOIN` condition is used to decide how to retrieve rows from table *`B`*. (In other words, any condition in the `WHERE` clause is not used.)
- All standard join optimizations are performed, with the exception that a table is always read after all tables on which it depends. If there is a circular dependency, an error occurs.
- All standard `WHERE` optimizations are performed.
- If there is a row in *`A`* that matches the `WHERE` clause, but there is no row in *`B`* that matches the `ON` condition, an extra *`B`* row is generated with all columns set to `NULL`.
- If you use `LEFT JOIN` to find rows that do not exist in some table and you have the following test: `*`col_name`* IS NULL` in the `WHERE` part, where *`col_name`* is a column that is declared as `NOT NULL`, MySQL stops searching for more rows (for a particular key combination) after it has found one row that matches the `LEFT JOIN` condition.

The `RIGHT JOIN` implementation is analogous to that of `LEFT JOIN` with the table roles reversed. Right joins are converted to equivalent left joins, as described in [Section 8.2.1.9, “Outer Join Simplification”](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/outer-join-simplification.html).

For a `LEFT JOIN`, if the `WHERE` condition is always false for the generated `NULL` row, the `LEFT JOIN` is changed to an inner join. For example, the `WHERE` clause would be false in the following query if `t2.column1` were `NULL`:

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 LEFT JOIN t2 ON (column1) WHERE t2.column2=5;
```

Therefore, it is safe to convert the query to an inner join:

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1, t2 WHERE t2.column2=5 AND t1.column1=t2.column1;
```



Now the optimizer can use table `t2` before table `t1` if doing so would result in a better query plan. To provide a hint about the table join order, use `STRAIGHT_JOIN`; see [Section 13.2.9, “SELECT Statement”](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/select.html). However, `STRAIGHT_JOIN` may prevent indexes from being used because it disables semijoin transformations; see [Section 8.2.2.1, “Optimizing Subqueries, Derived Tables, and View References with Semijoin Transformations”](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/semijoins.html).
