


#### 8.2.1.17 LIMIT Query Optimization



If you need only a specified number of rows from a result set, use a `LIMIT` clause in the query, rather than fetching the whole result set and throwing away the extra data.

MySQL sometimes optimizes a query that has a `LIMIT *`row_count`*` clause and no `HAVING` clause:

- If you select only a few rows with `LIMIT`, MySQL uses indexes in some cases when normally it would prefer to do a full table scan.

- If you combine `LIMIT *`row_count`*` with `ORDER BY`, MySQL stops sorting as soon as it has found the first *`row_count`* rows of the sorted result, rather than sorting the entire result. If ordering is done by using an index, this is very fast. If a filesort must be done, all rows that match the query without the `LIMIT` clause are selected, and most or all of them are sorted, before the first *`row_count`* are found. After the initial rows have been found, MySQL does not sort any remainder of the result set.

  One manifestation of this behavior is that an `ORDER BY` query with and without `LIMIT` may return rows in different order, as described later in this section.

- If you combine `LIMIT *`row_count`*` with `DISTINCT`, MySQL stops as soon as it finds *`row_count`* unique rows.

- In some cases, a `GROUP BY` can be resolved by reading the index in order (or doing a sort on the index), then calculating summaries until the index value changes. In this case, `LIMIT *`row_count`*` does not calculate any unnecessary `GROUP BY` values.

- As soon as MySQL has sent the required number of rows to the client, it aborts the query unless you are using `SQL_CALC_FOUND_ROWS`. In that case, the number of rows can be retrieved with `SELECT FOUND_ROWS()`. See [Section 12.16, “Information Functions”](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/information-functions.html).



- `LIMIT 0` quickly returns an empty set. This can be useful for checking the validity of a query. It can also be employed to obtain the types of the result columns within applications that use a MySQL API that makes result set metadata available. With the [**mysql**](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/mysql.html) client program, you can use the [`--column-type-info`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/5.7/en/mysql-command-options.html#option_mysql_column-type-info) option to display result column types.

- If the server uses temporary tables to resolve a query, it uses the `LIMIT *`row_count`*` clause to calculate how much space is required.

- If an index is not used for `ORDER BY` but a `LIMIT` clause is also present, the optimizer may be able to avoid using a merge file and sort the rows in memory using an in-memory `filesort` operation.

If multiple rows have identical values in the `ORDER BY` columns, the server is free to return those rows in any order, and may do so differently depending on the overall execution plan. In other words, the sort order of those rows is nondeterministic with respect to the nonordered columns.

One factor that affects the execution plan is `LIMIT`, so an `ORDER BY` query with and without `LIMIT` may return rows in different orders. Consider this query, which is sorted by the `category` column but nondeterministic with respect to the `id` and `rating` columns:

```sql
mysql> SELECT * FROM ratings ORDER BY category;
+----+----------+--------+
| id | category | rating |
+----+----------+--------+
|  1 |        1 |    4.5 |
|  5 |        1 |    3.2 |
|  3 |        2 |    3.7 |
|  4 |        2 |    3.5 |
|  6 |        2 |    3.5 |
|  2 |        3 |    5.0 |
|  7 |        3 |    2.7 |
+----+----------+--------+
```

Including `LIMIT` may affect order of rows within each `category` value. For example, this is a valid query result:

```sql
mysql> SELECT * FROM ratings ORDER BY category LIMIT 5;
+----+----------+--------+
| id | category | rating |
+----+----------+--------+
|  1 |        1 |    4.5 |
|  5 |        1 |    3.2 |
|  4 |        2 |    3.5 |
|  3 |        2 |    3.7 |
|  6 |        2 |    3.5 |
+----+----------+--------+
```

In each case, the rows are sorted by the `ORDER BY` column, which is all that is required by the SQL standard.

If it is important to ensure the same row order with and without `LIMIT`, include additional columns in the `ORDER BY` clause to make the order deterministic. For example, if `id` values are unique, you can make rows for a given `category` value appear in `id` order by sorting like this:

```sql
mysql> SELECT * FROM ratings ORDER BY category, id;
+----+----------+--------+
| id | category | rating |
+----+----------+--------+
|  1 |        1 |    4.5 |
|  5 |        1 |    3.2 |
|  3 |        2 |    3.7 |
|  4 |        2 |    3.5 |
|  6 |        2 |    3.5 |
|  2 |        3 |    5.0 |
|  7 |        3 |    2.7 |
+----+----------+--------+

mysql> SELECT * FROM ratings ORDER BY category, id LIMIT 5;
+----+----------+--------+
| id | category | rating |
+----+----------+--------+
|  1 |        1 |    4.5 |
|  5 |        1 |    3.2 |
|  3 |        2 |    3.7 |
|  4 |        2 |    3.5 |
|  6 |        2 |    3.5 |
+----+----------+--------+
```
