关系数据库理论和视图更新
==

解决通过视图更新数据时的各种疑难杂症

原作者: C. J. Date


## 版权信息 

ISBN: 978-1-449-35784-9


## 作者信息

C. J. Date

## 目 录

## 前 言(Preface)

This book is the third in a series. Its predecessors were as follows:


- SQL and Relational Theory: How to Write Accurate SQL Code (2nd edition)
- Database Design and Relational Theory: Normal Forms and All That Jazz

Both of these books were published by O’Reilly in 2012. The first was aimed at database
practitioners of all kinds; it explained the principles of relational theory and used those principles
as a basis for recommendations on how to use SQL as if it were a true relational language (a
discipline I referred to in that book as “using SQL relationally”). The second was a little more
specialized; it was aimed at database professionals with an interest in database design
specifically, and it explained the theory of relational database design and showed why that theory
was important. And this third book is more specialized too, inasmuch as it also focuses on one
specific technical issue—but the issue in question is an extremely important one, one that gets to
the heart of how relational database systems really ought to behave (as opposed to the way
today’s commercial SQL systems actually do behave, for the most part). That issue is a theory
of updating: a theory that, as the book’s title indicates, applies to the updating of views in
particular but is actually more general, in that it applies to the updating of “base data” just as
much as it does to the updating of views as such. Note: Despite this latter state of affairs, I
decided to emphasize the updating of views as such in the book’s title because it seems to me
that, while database practitioners in general believe they understand how updating works when
the target is base data, they’re typically more than a little skeptical as to whether it really works,
or can be made to work, when the target is a view. In fact, view updating as such is a
surprisingly controversial topic—which was and is, of course, a strong reason for wanting to
write this book in the first place.

With regard to those two earlier books, incidentally, I should probably apologize for the
large number of references to them (especially the first one) in the present book. Now, most
references in this book to other publications are given in full, as in this example:

  David McGoveran: “Accessing and Updating Views and Relations in a Relational Database,” U.S. Patent No. 7,263,512 (August 28th, 2007)


In the case of those previous books of mine in particular, however, I’ll refer to them from this
point forward by their abbreviated titles alone (viz., SQL and Relational Theory and Database
Design and Relational Theory, respectively).

  Aside: I’ve said I’ll be giving references to other publications in full, but actually there aren’t many such references anyway. Although numerous papers, articles, and other writings on view updating have appeared over the past 30 years or so, most of them—with the notable exception of certain publications by David McGoveran—advocate approaches that differ fairly drastically from the one described in the present book (see later in this preface for further discussion of this point). For the most part, therefore, I felt it inappropriate to reference them, except for an occasional citation here and there. If you’re interested in investigating some of those other approaches in more detail, you can find a short list of pertinent references in Chapter 10 of my book An Introduction to Database Systems (8th edition, Addison-Wesley, 2004). End of aside.

I should stress that I do assume throughout what follows that you’re familiar with much of
what’s covered in the SQL and Relational Theory book in particular. For example, I certainly
assume you know what relations, attributes, and tuples are. Now, I make no apology for this
state of affairs, since the present book is aimed at database professionals and database
professionals ought really to be familiar with most of what’s in that earlier book anyway. In
order to make the present book a little more self-contained, however, I do offer in Chapter 2
(“The Technical Context”) a brief review of pertinent aspects of that earlier book. I also offer in
Chapter 3 (“The View Concept: A Closer Look”) a more detailed summary of what views in
particular are and how they’re supposed to work.

### Who Should Read This Book

My target audience is database professionals, or more generally anyone interested in the
relational model, relational technology, or relational systems in general. As already indicated,
familiarity with the SQL and Relational Theory book would be a big help, but I believe the
present book has fresh insights to offer regarding relational theory in general, with special
reference to view updating in particular. Also, I think it’s worth pointing out that it might be
possible to use the ideas contained herein to guide a “roll your own” implementation (of view
updating, I mean), absent native support on the part of the pertinent DBMS.1 However, my
dearest wish in this regard is that DBMS implementers in particular will read this book and will
thereby be motivated to provide some native view update support in their own product. Note:
I’d also like to mention that I have a live seminar available based on the material in this book.
For further details, please go to the website www.justsql.co.uk/chris_date/chris_date.htm.


<hr/>

1' DBMS = database management system. Of course, there’s a difference between a DBMS and a database! Unfortunately, the
industry very commonly uses the term database when it means either some commercial product, such as Oracle, or the particular
copy of such a product that happens to be installed on some particular computer. I do not follow that usage in this book. The
problem is, if you call the DBMS a database, what do you call the database?


### Structure of the Book

I’ve said I assume you know what relations, attributes, and tuples are; more specifically, I
assume you know what views are, too, at least in general terms. Views were originally discussed
(though not by that name) in Codd’s very first paper on the relational model:
E. F. Codd: “Derivability, Redundancy, and Consistency of Relations Stored in Large Data
Banks,” IBM Research Report RJ599 (August 19th, 1969)
Now, the principal rationale for supporting views, as Codd himself foresaw in the paper
just referenced, is that they provide the means by which—at least in principle—the important
goal of logical data independence can be achieved. (The term logical data independence refers
to the ability to change the logical design of a database without having to make corresponding
changes in the way the database is perceived by users, thereby protecting investment in, among
other things, existing user training and existing applications. See Chapter 3 for further
discussion.) In other words, the primary raison d’être.for views is, precisely, the goal of logical
data independence. But if we’re to achieve that goal in practice and not just in principle, then it’s
clear that views have to be updatable.
So view updating is an important problem. As a consequence, it has been the focus of
considerable attention for quite some time now (at least 35 years or so), in both commercial and
academic environments, and several different approaches have been proposed—even
implemented, in some cases. However, the approaches in question all fail to provide a truly
satisfactory solution to the problem (not just in my opinion, but also in that of other writers, I
hasten to add). In the case of today’s mainstream SQL products, for example, the view updating
mechanisms are typically both:
 Incomplete, meaning they fail entirely to support updates on certain theoretically updatable
views, and also
 Incorrect, meaning even the view updates they do support they implement incorrectly, at
least in some cases
(Again, see Chapter 3 for further discussion of these points.) As for the research literature, it
seems to me that the writings in question typically overlook certain important factors—factors
that are crucial to a systematic, comprehensive, and correct solution to the problem. By contrast,
the solution described in detail in this book is indeed, I believe, a “systematic, comprehensive,
and correct” one. I also believe (though in this connection I must make it very clear that I’m not
an implementer myself) that the proposed solution could be incorporated into a relational DBMS
with comparatively modest conceptual extensions to the architecture of the system.


Aside: Note that I do carefully say “a relational DBMS” here. As will be seen, the
proposed solution relies heavily on the ability to state integrity constraints declaratively
(and on the ability of the DBMS to enforce them, of course). For my part, I regard such
capabilities as a sine qua non of a truly relational system. As I’m sure you’re aware,
however, most if not all of today’s SQL products are seriously deficient in this area. End of
aside.
With the foregoing by way of preamble, let me now say something about the way the text
is structured:
 Chapter 1 provides a motivating example that illustrates in simple and familiar terms
(actually SQL terms) the approach to view updating to be described in detail in subsequent
chapters. In particular, it demonstrates that “updating is updating,” regardless of whether
it’s a view or base data that’s being updated. That’s why, as I said earlier, the book is
concerned with what might be called a theory of updating in general—a theory that does
apply to views in particular, but applies to base data equally as much.
 Next, as previously mentioned, Chapter 2 offers a brief review of pertinent aspects of
relational theory. In particular, it emphasizes the nature of the database per se as “the one
true variable” and hence as the proper target for all operations of an updating nature.
 Chapter 3 then describes the view concept and related matters in detail. Of course, I’ve
already said I assume you know what views are in general terms, but this chapter covers a
lot of material you might not be so familiar with, material that’s essential to a proper
understanding of subsequent chapters.
 Chapters 4–13 then discuss, one by one, views based on a variety of familiar (and, in a few
cases, possibly not so familiar) relational operators—restriction, projection, join, and so on.
Chapter 4 in particular, on restriction views, also introduces by means of examples quite a
lot of additional foundation material (in fact, the chapter is in some respects a continuation
of Chapter 3). The chapter also gives some idea as to the plan to be followed in the next
nine chapters.
 Chapter 14 then investigates the question of combining operations (e.g., what’s involved in
updating a join of two restrictions, or a union of two joins?), a question that raises some
rather intriguing and possibly surprising issues.
 Finally, Chapter 15 presents an approach to resolving certain ambiguities that might arise—
or might be claimed to arise, at least—in connection with the scheme described in previous
chapters.

There are also two appendixes. Appendix A goes into detail on certain aspects of the all
important relational assignment operator. Appendix B contains definitions for purposes of
reference of the various relational operators considered in detail in the body of the book.
Note: As the foregoing outline should be sufficient to suggest, the book is definitely meant
to be read in sequence as written.


### Technical Notes

There are a few further preliminary points I need to cover here. First of all, note that I follow the
usual convention throughout this book in using the generic term update in lower case to refer to
the INSERT, DELETE, and UPDATE operators considered collectively (as well as to what I just
referred to as “the all important relational assignment operator”—see Chapter 2). When I want
to refer to the UPDATE operator as such, I’ll set it in all upper case (“all caps”) as just shown.
As for the INSERT and DELETE operators, however, where no ambiguity arises, it can be a
little tedious always to set them in all caps—especially when they’re being used as qualifiers, as
in, e.g., “INSERT rule” (“insert rule”?). I’ve therefore decided to use both forms in this book,
letting context be my guide in any given situation (and I won’t pretend I’ve been all that
consistent in this respect, either).
Second, please note that I use the term SQL to mean the standard version of that language
specifically, not some proprietary dialect (barring explicit statements to the contrary). In
particular, I follow the standard in assuming the pronunciation “ess cue ell,” not “sequel”
(though this latter pronunciation is common in the field), thereby writing things like an SQL
table, not a SQL table. Note: The SQL standard has been through several versions, or editions,
over the years. The version current at the time of writing is SQL:2011. Here’s the formal
reference:
International Organization for Standardization (ISO): Database Language SQL, Document
ISO/IEC 9075:2011 (2011)
Third and last, I need to say something about my use of the term user; in particular, I need
to explain what I mean by my frequent use of phrases such as “what the user sees” or “the user’s
perception of the database.” In general, you can take the term user to refer to either an
interactive user2 or an application programmer or both, as the context demands. As for “what the
user sees” and similar phrases, what I’m referring to here is the fact that most users interact, not
with the database in its entirety, but rather with some subset of that entire database, defined by
what’s sometimes called a subschema. What’s more, thanks to the view mechanism, that subset
can and often does involve some logical restructuring. In fact, we can (and I will) assume for simplicity, and without loss of generality, that the subset in question consists exclusively of
views, even if some of the views in question are effectively identical to the base data from which
they’re derived. Of course, to the user of that subset, that collection of views is the database! In
other words, database is a relative term, in a sense. Thus, we can usefully, albeit somewhat
loosely, define a database, at least for the purposes of this book, to be either a given collection of
data—i.e., the given base data—or some specific subset, possibly restructured, of that given
collection. Note: When I say “somewhat loosely” here, what I have in mind primarily is the fact
that a database is more than just data as such—the pertinent integrity constraints need to be taken
into account as well, as we’ll see in Chapters 2 and 3.


<hr/>

2' But still someone who knows something about database issues, not a genuine “end user,” who might quite reasonably be totally
ignorant of such matters.


### Acknowledgments

I’d like to begin by thanking my wife Lindy once again for her support throughout the
production of this book, as well as all of its predecessors. I’d also like to thank my friends and
colleagues Hugh Darwen, David Livingstone, and David McGoveran for their detailed and
comprehensive reviews of earlier drafts of this book. Those reviewers and their reviews were all
very helpful in different ways, but David McGoveran in particular deserves special thanks—first
of all, for originally suggesting the basic idea on which the view updating approach described in
this book is based; second, for communicating and collaborating with me on this topic many
times over the past 20 years or so; and last but not least, for his extensive theoretical work in this
area. David also went considerably beyond the call of duty in his review: He not only
commented on the text as such, he actually compiled and sent me a series of short essays on
various aspects of the subject matter. Those essays were extremely helpful to me in my task of
rewriting, and I believe they’ve resulted in a greatly improved text. Of course, I haven’t
incorporated all of his suggestions—I don’t believe any author ever does act on all of the
comments he or she receives from reviewers! But I’ve tried to do justice to what seemed to me
to be the most important and substantive of his comments. Of course, it goes without saying
that, as always, any remaining errors are my responsibility.




	C. J. Date
	Healdsburg, California
	2013




## 序 (Foreword)

In the field of relational database theory and practice there have been two particularly thorny and
controversial issues, neither of which has been resolved to everybody’s satisfaction: the missing
information problem and the view updating problem. On the first of these, Chris Date has
written copiously over the last 30 years or so; now he tackles the second one head on.
It’s not as though he hasn’t addressed the subject before, of course. His well known and
widely used textbook, An Introduction to Database Systems, included material—well, a page or
two, at any rate—on the subject in its very first edition, published in 1975. That page count grew
to sixteen or so in the eighth edition (2004). His first whole chapter on the subject appeared in
the book that started his long running Relational Database Writings series, in 1986. In the fourth
book in that series, which appeared in 1995, he and David McGoveran gave us two chapters that
showed evidence of a major shift in thinking on the issue, based on McGoveran’s work. That
thinking then further evolved in an appendix in Databases, Types, and the Relational Model: The
Third Manifesto (2007), through a chapter in Database Explorations (2010), and on to the
present volume.
The basic idea, first mooted by E. F. Codd in 1969, has never changed. Assume we’re
given a database consisting, by definition, of (a) some collection of relation variables or relvars,1
together with (b) a set of integrity constraints governing the permissible values of those relvars.
Those given relvars are said to be the base ones. In general, the chosen design is one of several
that could have been chosen to represent exactly the same information. From the chosen design
we can derive an alternative one by defining virtual relvars, or views, in terms of relational
expressions referencing the base relvars. For various reasons, such an alternative design—an
alternative view of the database, in effect—might be considered more suitable than the base
design for certain users. More importantly, that alternative design might actually exclude parts
of the underlying or “real” database that some users have no interest in, or perhaps are not
authorized to see. Moreover, if some change to the base design becomes necessary, virtual
relvars representing the original design can be defined on the new design, such that existing
users’ views of the database are immune to the change and potentially unpleasant upheavals are
avoided. This is the basic idea behind the well known goal of logical data independence.
The thorny issues arise when users express database updates in terms of updates against the
virtual relvars they see as constituting their database. How is the DBMS to determine the real
updates to the real database that will cause the specified changes to occur in those virtual relvars?
And if there are several ways of achieving the desired effect, which one should be chosen? For a
simple example, suppose a user of the usual suppliers-and-parts database (described in detail in
Chapter 1) sees a virtual relvar, or view, PS that shows only those suppliers that are located in
Paris. The defining expression for view PS is, of course, S WHERE CITY = ‘Paris’. Now suppose that same user tells the DBMS to delete the tuple for supplier S2 from that view PS.
Should the DBMS assume that supplier S2 no longer exists and delete the underlying tuple from
base relvar S? Or should it reject the request as being ambiguous, considering that the same
effect could be achieved by replacing supplier S2’s CITY value by something other than Paris?
Moreover, suppose the user actually knows supplier S2 has moved to London and attempts to
effect that change by “updating the tuple” for supplier S2 accordingly in view PS. Should the
DBMS accept that update? Now suppose still further that view PS excludes the STATUS
attribute. How should the DBMS react to an attempt by that user to insert tuples into that view,
given that such tuples must necessarily omit values for STATUS?

<hr/>

1' SQL would call those relvars tables. For further explanation of the terminology of relvars and related matters, see Chapter 2.


These and many more are the kinds of questions Date attempts to answer in the detailed,
thorough, careful, methodical analysis he now offers us. He lays out his plan of attack in the first
three chapters. He clearly defines what it means for two database designs to be equivalent in the
sense of representing the same information, and he then describes the methodology applied in the
next ten chapters. That methodology entails examining each of the operators of the relational
algebra in turn. For example, that “Paris suppliers only” view PS is what he calls a restriction
view—i.e., a virtual relvar defined using just the restriction operator. Likewise, the view that
excludes the STATUS attribute from PS is defined using projection. As this latter view is a
projection of a restriction, we can infer the effects of updates on it by invoking Date’s rules for
updating through projection to determine the effects on the underlying restriction, then invoke
the rules for updating though restriction to determine the effects on the underlying base relvar S.
Applying the rules for a view whose definition involves several relational operations raises
a very interesting and possibly controversial issue that Date addresses in Chapter 14: viz., if two
expressions are syntactically distinct but logically equivalent (in the way that, for example, the
numerical expressions x(y+z) and xy+xz are syntactically distinct but logically equivalent),
should views defined on those expressions necessarily exhibit identical behavior with respect to
update operations on them?
Now, some aspects of Date’s proposals proved to be controversial when they appeared in
the 2007 and 2010 publications I mentioned earlier. For example, should a tuple inserted into a
view defined on the union of R1 and R2 result in that tuple appearing in both R1 and R2? And
should a tuple being deleted from a view defined on the intersection of R1 and R2 result in that
tuple disappearing from both R1 and R2? I am on record as being one of those who expressed
opposition to those particular proposals—this being, I hasten to add, the only serious technical
disagreement between Date and myself that has arisen during our long period of collaboration.
Those controversial details are retained here and Date has strengthened his rationale for them,
though admitting that he might still fail to convince everybody who was against them. For my
part, I found that his final chapter, “Ambiguity Revisited,” offers an intriguing possibility of light
at the end of this particular tunnel. In it he describes in outline an idea, due to David
McGoveran, for a radically different approach to the language we use for updating relational
databases, effectively replacing—or at least extending—the familiar INSERT, DELETE, and
UPDATE operators that have been with us in some form or other since prerelational times.

Among the advantages claimed for this novel approach is that the problems giving rise to the
controversy I have mentioned simply do not arise.
Date tells us that he does not expect or even wish this book to be the end of the story on
view updating, but he hopes it will provide a firm basis on which the debate can move forward. I
think that is exactly what he has provided, and I join him in that hope.

	Hugh Darwen
	Shrewley, England
	2013