
### 4.10.2. Verification by Type Inference

A `class` file that does not contain a `StackMapTable` attribute (which necessarily has a version number of 49.0 or below) must be verified using type inference.

#### 4.10.2.1. The Process of Verification by Type Inference

During linking, the verifier checks the `code` array of the `Code` attribute for each method of the `class` file by performing data-flow analysis on each method. The verifier ensures that at any given point in the program, no matter what code path is taken to reach that point, all of the following are true:

- The operand stack is always the same size and contains the same types of values.
- No local variable is accessed unless it is known to contain a value of an appropriate type.
- Methods are invoked with the appropriate arguments.
- Fields are assigned only using values of appropriate types.
- All opcodes have appropriately typed arguments on the operand stack and in the local variable array.

For efficiency reasons, certain tests that could in principle be performed by the verifier are delayed until the first time the code for the method is actually invoked. In so doing, the verifier avoids loading `class` files unless it has to.

For example, if a method invokes another method that returns an instance of class A, and that instance is assigned only to a field of the same type, the verifier does not bother to check if the class A actually exists. However, if it is assigned to a field of the type B, the definitions of both A and B must be loaded in to ensure that A is a subclass of B.

#### 4.10.2.2. The Bytecode Verifier

The code for each method is verified independently. First, the bytes that make up the code are broken up into a sequence of instructions, and the index into the `code` array of the start of each instruction is placed in an array. The verifier then goes through the code a second time and parses the instructions. During this pass a data structure is built to hold information about each Java Virtual Machine instruction in the method. The operands, if any, of each instruction are checked to make sure they are valid. For instance:

- Branches must be within the bounds of the `code` array for the method.
- The targets of all control-flow instructions are each the start of an instruction. In the case of a *wide* instruction, the *wide* opcode is considered the start of the instruction, and the opcode giving the operation modified by that *wide* instruction is not considered to start an instruction. Branches into the middle of an instruction are disallowed.
- No instruction can access or modify a local variable at an index greater than or equal to the number of local variables that its method indicates it allocates.
- All references to the constant pool must be to an entry of the appropriate type. (For example, the instruction *getfield* must reference a field.)
- The code does not end in the middle of an instruction.
- Execution cannot fall off the end of the code.
- For each exception handler, the starting and ending point of code protected by the handler must be at the beginning of an instruction or, in the case of the ending point, immediately past the end of the code. The starting point must be before the ending point. The exception handler code must start at a valid instruction, and it must not start at an opcode being modified by the *wide* instruction.

For each instruction of the method, the verifier records the contents of the operand stack and the contents of the local variable array prior to the execution of that instruction. For the operand stack, it needs to know the stack height and the type of each value on it. For each local variable, it needs to know either the type of the contents of that local variable or that the local variable contains an unusable or unknown value (it might be uninitialized). The bytecode verifier does not need to distinguish between the integral types (e.g., `byte`, `short`, `char`) when determining the value types on the operand stack.

Next, a data-flow analyzer is initialized. For the first instruction of the method, the local variables that represent parameters initially contain values of the types indicated by the method's type descriptor; the operand stack is empty. All other local variables contain an illegal value. For the other instructions, which have not been examined yet, no information is available regarding the operand stack or local variables.

Finally, the data-flow analyzer is run. For each instruction, a "changed" bit indicates whether this instruction needs to be looked at. Initially, the "changed" bit is set only for the first instruction. The data-flow analyzer executes the following loop:

1. Select a Java Virtual Machine instruction whose "changed" bit is set. If no instruction remains whose "changed" bit is set, the method has successfully been verified. Otherwise, turn off the "changed" bit of the selected instruction.

2. Model the effect of the instruction on the operand stack and local variable array by doing the following:

   - If the instruction uses values from the operand stack, ensure that there are a sufficient number of values on the stack and that the top values on the stack are of an appropriate type. Otherwise, verification fails.
   - If the instruction uses a local variable, ensure that the specified local variable contains a value of the appropriate type. Otherwise, verification fails.
   - If the instruction pushes values onto the operand stack, ensure that there is sufficient room on the operand stack for the new values. Add the indicated types to the top of the modeled operand stack.
   - If the instruction modifies a local variable, record that the local variable now contains the new type.

3. Determine the instructions that can follow the current instruction. Successor instructions can be one of the following:

   - The next instruction, if the current instruction is not an unconditional control transfer instruction (for instance, *goto*, *return*, or *athrow*). Verification fails if it is possible to "fall off" the last instruction of the method.
   - The target(s) of a conditional or unconditional branch or switch.
   - Any exception handlers for this instruction.

4. Merge the state of the operand stack and local variable array at the end of the execution of the current instruction into each of the successor instructions.

   In the special case of control transfer to an exception handler, the operand stack is set to contain a single object of the exception type indicated by the exception handler information. There must be sufficient room on the operand stack for this single value, as if an instruction had pushed it.

   - If this is the first time the successor instruction has been visited, record that the operand stack and local variable values calculated in steps 2 and 3 are the state of the operand stack and local variable array prior to executing the successor instruction. Set the "changed" bit for the successor instruction.
   - If the successor instruction has been seen before, merge the operand stack and local variable values calculated in steps 2 and 3 into the values already there. Set the "changed" bit if there is any modification to the values.

5. Continue at step 1.

To merge two operand stacks, the number of values on each stack must be identical. Then, corresponding values on the two stacks are compared and the value on the merged stack is computed, as follows:

- If one value is a primitive type, then the corresponding value must be the same primitive type. The merged value is the primitive type.

- If one value is a non-array reference type, then the corresponding value must be a reference type (array or non-array). The merged value is a reference to an instance of the first common supertype of the two reference types. (Such a reference type always exists because the type `Object` is a supertype of all class, interface, and array types.)

  For example, `Object` and `String` can be merged; the result is `Object`. Similarly, `Object` and `String``[]` can be merged; the result is again `Object`. Even `Object` and `int``[]` can be merged, or `String` and `int``[]`; the result is `Object` for both.

- If corresponding values are both array reference types, then their dimensions are examined. If the array types have the same dimensions, then the merged value is a `reference` to an instance of an array type which is first common supertype of both array types. (If either or both of the array types has a primitive element type, then `Object` is used as the element type instead.) If the array types have different dimensions, then the merged value is a `reference` to an instance of an array type whose dimension is the smaller of the two; the element type is `Cloneable` or `java.io.Serializable` if the smaller array type was `Cloneable` or `java.io.Serializable`, and `Object` otherwise.

  For example, `Object``[]` and `String``[]` can be merged; the result is `Object``[]`. `Cloneable``[]` and `String``[]` can be merged, or `java.io.Serializable``[]` and `String``[]`; the result is `Cloneable``[]` and `java.io.Serializable``[]` respectively. Even `int``[]` and `String``[]` can be merged; the result is `Object``[]`, because `Object` is used instead of `int` when computing the first common supertype.

  Since the array types can have different dimensions, `Object``[]` and `String``[]``[]` can be merged, or `Object``[]``[]` and `String``[]`; in both cases the result is `Object``[]`. `Cloneable``[]` and`String``[]``[]` can be merged; the result is `Cloneable``[]`. Finally, `Cloneable``[]``[]` and `String``[]` can be merged; the result is `Object``[]`.

If the operand stacks cannot be merged, verification of the method fails.

To merge two local variable array states, corresponding pairs of local variables are compared. The value of the merged local variable is computed using the rules above, except that the corresponding values are permitted to be different primitive types. In that case, the verifier records that the merged local variable contains an unusable value.

If the data-flow analyzer runs on a method without reporting a verification failure, then the method has been successfully verified by the `class` file verifier.

Certain instructions and data types complicate the data-flow analyzer. We now examine each of these in more detail.

#### 4.10.2.3. Values of Types `long` and `double`

Values of the `long` and `double` types are treated specially by the verification process.

Whenever a value of type `long` or `double` is moved into a local variable at index *n*, index *n*+1 is specially marked to indicate that it has been reserved by the value at index *n* and must not be used as a local variable index. Any value previously at index *n*+1 becomes unusable.

Whenever a value is moved to a local variable at index *n*, the index *n*-1 is examined to see if it is the index of a value of type `long` or `double`. If so, the local variable at index *n*-1 is changed to indicate that it now contains an unusable value. Since the local variable at index *n* has been overwritten, the local variable at index *n*-1 cannot represent a value of type `long`or `double`.

Dealing with values of types `long` or `double` on the operand stack is simpler; the verifier treats them as single values on the stack. For example, the verification code for the *dadd*opcode (add two `double` values) checks that the top two items on the stack are both of type `double`. When calculating operand stack length, values of type `long` and `double` have length two.

Untyped instructions that manipulate the operand stack must treat values of type `long` and `double` as atomic (indivisible). For example, the verifier reports a failure if the top value on the stack is a `double` and it encounters an instruction such as *pop* or *dup*. The instructions *pop2* or *dup2* must be used instead.

#### 4.10.2.4. Instance Initialization Methods and Newly Created Objects

Creating a new class instance is a multistep process. The statement:

```
...
new myClass(i, j, k);
...

```

can be implemented by the following:

```
...
new #1            // Allocate uninitialized space for myClass
dup               // Duplicate object on the operand stack
iload_1           // Push i
iload_2           // Push j
iload_3           // Push k
invokespecial #5  // Invoke myClass.<init>
...

```

This instruction sequence leaves the newly created and initialized object on top of the operand stack. (Additional examples of compilation to the instruction set of the Java Virtual Machine are given in [ยง3 (*Compiling for the Java Virtual Machine*)](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-3.html).)

The instance initialization method ([ยง2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)) for class `myClass` sees the new uninitialized object as its `this` argument in local variable 0. Before that method invokes another instance initialization method of `myClass` or its direct superclass on `this`, the only operation the method can perform on `this` is assigning fields declared within `myClass`.

When doing dataflow analysis on instance methods, the verifier initializes local variable 0 to contain an object of the current class, or, for instance initialization methods, local variable 0 contains a special type indicating an uninitialized object. After an appropriate instance initialization method is invoked (from the current class or its direct superclass) on this object, all occurrences of this special type on the verifier's model of the operand stack and in the local variable array are replaced by the current class type. The verifier rejects code that uses the new object before it has been initialized or that initializes the object more than once. In addition, it ensures that every normal return of the method has invoked an instance initialization method either in the class of this method or in the direct superclass.

Similarly, a special type is created and pushed on the verifier's model of the operand stack as the result of the Java Virtual Machine instruction *new*. The special type indicates the instruction by which the class instance was created and the type of the uninitialized class instance created. When an instance initialization method declared in the class of the uninitialized class instance is invoked on that class instance, all occurrences of the special type are replaced by the intended type of the class instance. This change in type may propagate to subsequent instructions as the dataflow analysis proceeds.

The instruction number needs to be stored as part of the special type, as there may be multiple not-yet-initialized instances of a class in existence on the operand stack at one time. For example, the Java Virtual Machine instruction sequence that implements:

```
new InputStream(new Foo(), new InputStream("foo"))

```

may have two uninitialized instances of `InputStream` on the operand stack at once. When an instance initialization method is invoked on a class instance, only those occurrences of the special type on the operand stack or in the local variable array that are the same object as the class instance are replaced.

#### 4.10.2.5. Exceptions and `finally`

To implement the `try`-`finally` construct, a compiler for the Java programming language that generates `class` files with version number 50.0 or below may use the exception-handling facilities together with two special instructions: *jsr* ("jump to subroutine") and *ret* ("return from subroutine"). The `finally` clause is compiled as a subroutine within the Java Virtual Machine code for its method, much like the code for an exception handler. When a *jsr* instruction that invokes the subroutine is executed, it pushes its return address, the address of the instruction after the *jsr* that is being executed, onto the operand stack as a value of type `returnAddress`. The code for the subroutine stores the return address in a local variable. At the end of the subroutine, a *ret* instruction fetches the return address from the local variable and transfers control to the instruction at the return address.

Control can be transferred to the `finally` clause (the `finally` subroutine can be invoked) in several different ways. If the `try` clause completes normally, the `finally` subroutine is invoked via a *jsr* instruction before evaluating the next expression. A `break` or `continue` inside the `try` clause that transfers control outside the `try` clause executes a *jsr* to the code for the `finally` clause first. If the `try` clause executes a *return*, the compiled code does the following:

1. Saves the return value (if any) in a local variable.
2. Executes a *jsr* to the code for the `finally` clause.
3. Upon return from the `finally` clause, returns the value saved in the local variable.

The compiler sets up a special exception handler, which catches any exception thrown by the `try` clause. If an exception is thrown in the `try` clause, this exception handler does the following:

1. Saves the exception in a local variable.
2. Executes a *jsr* to the `finally` clause.
3. Upon return from the `finally` clause, rethrows the exception.

For more information about the implementation of the `try`-`finally` construct, see [ยง3.13](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-3.html#jvms-3.13).

The code for the `finally` clause presents a special problem to the verifier. Usually, if a particular instruction can be reached via multiple paths and a particular local variable contains incompatible values through those multiple paths, then the local variable becomes unusable. However, a `finally` clause might be called from several different places, yielding several different circumstances:

- The invocation from the exception handler may have a certain local variable that contains an exception.
- The invocation to implement *return* may have some local variable that contains the return value.
- The invocation from the bottom of the `try` clause may have an indeterminate value in that same local variable.

The code for the `finally` clause itself might pass verification, but after completing the updating all the successors of the *ret* instruction, the verifier would note that the local variable that the exception handler expects to hold an exception, or that the return code expects to hold a return value, now contains an indeterminate value.

Verifying code that contains a `finally` clause is complicated. The basic idea is the following:

- Each instruction keeps track of the list of *jsr* targets needed to reach that instruction. For most code, this list is empty. For instructions inside code for the `finally` clause, it is of length one. For multiply nested `finally` code (extremely rare!), it may be longer than one.
- For each instruction and each *jsr* needed to reach that instruction, a bit vector is maintained of all local variables accessed or modified since the execution of the *jsr* instruction.
- When executing the *ret* instruction, which implements a return from a subroutine, there must be only one possible subroutine from which the instruction can be returning. Two different subroutines cannot "merge" their execution to a single *ret* instruction.
- To perform the data-flow analysis on a *ret* instruction, a special procedure is used. Since the verifier knows the subroutine from which the instruction must be returning, it can find all the *jsr* instructions that call the subroutine and merge the state of the operand stack and local variable array at the time of the *ret* instruction into the operand stack and local variable array of the instructions following the *jsr*. Merging uses a special set of values for local variables:
  - For any local variable that the bit vector (constructed above) indicates has been accessed or modified by the subroutine, use the type of the local variable at the time of the *ret*.
  - For other local variables, use the type of the local variable before the *jsr* instruction.
