
## 4.11. Limitations of the Java Virtual Machine

The following limitations of the Java Virtual Machine are implicit in the `class` file format:

- The per-class or per-interface constant pool is limited to 65535 entries by the 16-bit `constant_pool_count` field of the `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)). This acts as an internal limit on the total complexity of a single class or interface.

- The number of fields that may be declared by a class or interface is limited to 65535 by the size of the `fields_count` item of the `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)).

  Note that the value of the `fields_count` item of the `ClassFile` structure does not include fields that are inherited from superclasses or superinterfaces.

- The number of methods that may be declared by a class or interface is limited to 65535 by the size of the `methods_count` item of the `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)).

  Note that the value of the `methods_count` item of the `ClassFile` structure does not include methods that are inherited from superclasses or superinterfaces.

- The number of direct superinterfaces of a class or interface is limited to 65535 by the size of the `interfaces_count` item of the `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)).

- The greatest number of local variables in the local variables array of a frame created upon invocation of a method ([§2.6](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.6)) is limited to 65535 by the size of the `max_locals` item of the `Code` attribute ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)) giving the code of the method, and by the 16-bit local variable indexing of the Java Virtual Machine instruction set.

  Note that values of type `long` and `double` are each considered to reserve two local variables and contribute two units toward the `max_locals` value, so use of local variables of those types further reduces this limit.

- The size of an operand stack in a frame ([§2.6](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.6)) is limited to 65535 values by the `max_stack` field of the `Code` attribute ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)).

  Note that values of type `long` and `double` are each considered to contribute two units toward the `max_stack` value, so use of values of these types on the operand stack further reduces this limit.

- The number of method parameters is limited to 255 by the definition of a method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)), where the limit includes one unit for `this` in the case of instance or interface method invocations.

  Note that a method descriptor is defined in terms of a notion of method parameter length in which a parameter of type `long` or `double` contributes two units to the length, so parameters of these types further reduce the limit.

- The length of field and method names, field and method descriptors, and other constant string values (including those referenced by `ConstantValue` ([§4.7.2](#jvms-4.7.2)) attributes) is limited to 65535 characters by the 16-bit unsigned `length` item of the `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)).

  Note that the limit is on the number of bytes in the encoding and not on the number of encoded characters. UTF-8 encodes some characters using two or three bytes. Thus, strings incorporating multibyte characters are further constrained.

- The number of dimensions in an array is limited to 255 by the size of the *dimensions* opcode of the *multianewarray* instruction and by the constraints imposed on the*multianewarray*, *anewarray*, and *newarray* instructions ([§4.9.1](#jvms-4.9.1), [§4.9.2](#jvms-4.9.2)).



