## 4.3. Descriptors

A *descriptor* is a string representing the type of a field or method. Descriptors are represented in the `class` file format using modified UTF-8 strings ([ยง4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) and thus may be drawn, where not further constrained, from the entire Unicode codespace.

### 4.3.1. Grammar Notation

Descriptors are specified using a grammar. The grammar is a set of productions that describe how sequences of characters can form syntactically correct descriptors of various kinds. Terminal symbols of the grammar are shown in `fixed width` font. Nonterminal symbols are shown in *italic* type. The definition of a nonterminal is introduced by the name of the nonterminal being defined, followed by a colon. One or more alternative definitions for the nonterminal then follow on succeeding lines.

The syntax *{x}* on the right-hand side of a production denotes zero or more occurrences of *x*.

The phrase *(one of)* on the right-hand side of a production signifies that each of the terminal symbols on the following line or lines is an alternative definition.

### 4.3.2. Field Descriptors

A *field descriptor* represents the type of a class, instance, or local variable.

FieldDescriptor:

[FieldType](#jvms-FieldType)

FieldType:

[BaseType](#jvms-BaseType) 
[ObjectType](#jvms-ObjectType) 
[ArrayType](#jvms-ArrayType)

BaseType:

(one of) 
`B` `C` `D` `F` `I` `J` `S` `Z`

ObjectType:

`L` ClassName `;`

ArrayType:

`[` [ComponentType](#jvms-ComponentType)

ComponentType:

[FieldType](#jvms-FieldType)

The characters of *BaseType*, the `L` and `;` of *ObjectType*, and the `[` of *ArrayType* are all ASCII characters.

*ClassName* represents a binary class or interface name encoded in internal form ([ยง4.2.1](#jvms-4.2.1)).

The interpretation of field descriptors as types is shown in [Table 4.3-A](#jvms-4.3.2-200).

A field descriptor representing an array type is valid only if it represents a type with 255 or fewer dimensions.

**Table 4.3-A. Interpretation of field descriptors**

| *FieldType* term    | Type        | Interpretation                           |
| ------------------- | ----------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `B`                 | `byte`      | signed byte                              |
| `C`                 | `char`      | Unicode character code point in the Basic Multilingual Plane, encoded with UTF-16 |
| `D`                 | `double`    | double-precision floating-point value    |
| `F`                 | `float`     | single-precision floating-point value    |
| `I`                 | `int`       | integer                                  |
| `J`                 | `long`      | long integer                             |
| `L` *ClassName* `;` | `reference` | an instance of class *ClassName*         |
| `S`                 | `short`     | signed short                             |
| `Z`                 | `boolean`   | `true` or `false`                        |
| `[`                 | `reference` | one array dimension                      |

The field descriptor of an instance variable of type `int` is simply `I`.

The field descriptor of an instance variable of type `Object` is `Ljava/lang/Object;`. Note that the internal form of the binary name for class `Object` is used.

The field descriptor of an instance variable of the multidimensional array type `double[][][]` is `[[[D`.

### 4.3.3. Method Descriptors

A *method descriptor* contains zero or more *parameter descriptors*, representing the types of parameters that the method takes, and a *return descriptor*, representing the type of the value (if any) that the method returns.

MethodDescriptor:

`(` {[ParameterDescriptor](#jvms-ParameterDescriptor)} `)` [ReturnDescriptor](#jvms-ReturnDescriptor)

ParameterDescriptor:

[FieldType](#jvms-FieldType)

ReturnDescriptor:

[FieldType](#jvms-FieldType) 
[VoidDescriptor](#jvms-VoidDescriptor)

VoidDescriptor:

`V`

The character `V` indicates that the method returns no value (its result is `void`).

The method descriptor for the method:

```
Object m(int i, double d, Thread t) {...}

```

is:

```
(IDLjava/lang/Thread;)Ljava/lang/Object;

```

Note that the internal forms of the binary names of `Thread` and `Object` are used.

A method descriptor is valid only if it represents method parameters with a total length of 255 or less, where that length includes the contribution for `this` in the case of instance or interface method invocations. The total length is calculated by summing the contributions of the individual parameters, where a parameter of type `long` or `double` contributes two units to the length and a parameter of any other type contributes one unit.

A method descriptor is the same whether the method it describes is a class method or an instance method. Although an instance method is passed `this`, a reference to the object on which the method is being invoked, in addition to its intended arguments, that fact is not reflected in the method descriptor. The reference to `this` is passed implicitly by the Java Virtual Machine instructions which invoke instance methods ([ยง2.6.1](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.6.1), [ยง4.11](#jvms-4.11)).



