## 4.4. The Constant Pool

## 4.4. 常量池

Java Virtual Machine instructions do not rely on the run-time layout of classes, interfaces, class instances, or arrays. Instead, instructions refer to symbolic information in the`constant_pool` table.

Java虚拟机指令(Java Virtual Machine instructions)不依赖运行时的内存布局,包括类,接口,类实例以及数组的具体布局。 指令只引用 `constant_pool` 表中的符号信息。

All `constant_pool` table entries have the following general format:

常量池(`constant_pool`)中的每一项都有统一的格式:

```
cp_info {
    u1 tag;
    u1 info[];
}

```



Each item in the `constant_pool` table must begin with a 1-byte tag indicating the kind of `cp_info` entry. The contents of the `info` array vary with the value of `tag`. The valid tags and their values are listed in [Table 4.4-A](#jvms-4.4-140). Each tag byte must be followed by two or more bytes giving information about the specific constant. The format of the additional information varies with the tag value.

`constant_pool` 中的每一项(`cp_info`), 起始都是1字节的标签开始, 用于指示该 `cp_info` 的类型。不同tag对应的`info`数组的内容各不相同。 [Table 4.4-A]()列出了有效的tag和对应值。 每个标签字节必须紧随其后的是两个或两个以上的字节给特定的信息不变.附加信息的格式随标签值。



**Table 4.4-A. Constant pool tags**

| Constant Type                 | Value |
| ----------------------------- | ----- |
| `CONSTANT_Class`              | 7     |
| `CONSTANT_Fieldref`           | 9     |
| `CONSTANT_Methodref`          | 10    |
| `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref` | 11    |
| `CONSTANT_String`             | 8     |
| `CONSTANT_Integer`            | 3     |
| `CONSTANT_Float`              | 4     |
| `CONSTANT_Long`               | 5     |
| `CONSTANT_Double`             | 6     |
| `CONSTANT_NameAndType`        | 12    |
| `CONSTANT_Utf8`               | 1     |
| `CONSTANT_MethodHandle`       | 15    |
| `CONSTANT_MethodType`         | 16    |
| `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic`      | 18    |

### 4.4.1. The `CONSTANT_Class_info` Structure

The `CONSTANT_Class_info` structure is used to represent a class or an interface:

```
CONSTANT_Class_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 name_index;
}

```

The items of the `CONSTANT_Class_info` structure are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item has the value `CONSTANT_Class` (7).

- name_index

  The value of the `name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a valid binary class or interface name encoded in internal form ([§4.2.1](#jvms-4.2.1)).

Because arrays are objects, the opcodes *anewarray* and *multianewarray* - but not the opcode *new* - can reference array "classes" via `CONSTANT_Class_info` structures in the `constant_pool` table. For such array classes, the name of the class is the descriptor of the array type ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2)).

arrays也各不相同,因此,opcodes饰品are anewarray * * * * multianewarray宗旨和集体opcode * *纽约“职等”的结论references can经由`CONSTANT_Class_info`结构`constant_pool`表。对于这样的数组类,类的名称是数组类型的描述符((§4.3.2)(# jvms-4.3.2))。

For example, the class name representing the two-dimensional array type `int[][]` is `[[I`, while the class name representing the type `Thread[]` is `[Ljava/lang/Thread;`.

例如,代表二维数组类型的类名`int[][]`是`[[I`,而代表类型的类名`Thread[]`是`[Ljava/lang/Thread;`。

An array type descriptor is valid only if it represents 255 or fewer dimensions.

数组类型描述符是有效的只有代表255个或更少的维度。

### 4.4.2. The `CONSTANT_Fieldref_info`, `CONSTANT_Methodref_info`, and `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info` Structures

### 10/24/11。的`CONSTANT_Fieldref_info`,`CONSTANT_Methodref_info`,`CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info`结构

Fields, methods, and interface methods are represented by similar structures:

字段、方法和接口方法由类似的结构:


```
CONSTANT_Fieldref_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 class_index;
    u2 name_and_type_index;
}

CONSTANT_Methodref_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 class_index;
    u2 name_and_type_index;
}

CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 class_index;
    u2 name_and_type_index;
}

```

The items of these structures are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item of a `CONSTANT_Fieldref_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_Fieldref` (9).The `tag` item of a `CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_Methodref` (10).The `tag` item of a `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref` (11).

- class_index

  The value of the `class_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Class_info` structure ([§4.4.1](#jvms-4.4.1)) representing a class or interface type that has the field or method as a member.The `class_index` item of a `CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure must be a class type, not an interface type.The `class_index` item of a `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info` structure must be an interface type.The `class_index` item of a `CONSTANT_Fieldref_info` structure may be either a class type or an interface type.

- name_and_type_index

  The value of the `name_and_type_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info`structure ([§4.4.6](#jvms-4.4.6)). This `constant_pool` entry indicates the name and descriptor of the field or method.In a `CONSTANT_Fieldref_info`, the indicated descriptor must be a field descriptor ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2)). Otherwise, the indicated descriptor must be a method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)).If the name of the method of a `CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure begins with a '`<`' ('`\u003c`'), then the name must be the special name `<init>`, representing an instance initialization method ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)). The return type of such a method must be `void`.

### 4.4.3. The `CONSTANT_String_info` Structure

The `CONSTANT_String_info` structure is used to represent constant objects of the type `String`:

```
CONSTANT_String_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 string_index;
}

```

The items of the `CONSTANT_String_info` structure are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_String_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_String` (8).

- string_index

  The value of the `string_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the sequence of Unicode code points to which the `String` object is to be initialized.

### 4.4.4. The `CONSTANT_Integer_info` and `CONSTANT_Float_info` Structures

The `CONSTANT_Integer_info` and `CONSTANT_Float_info` structures represent 4-byte numeric (`int` and `float`) constants:

```
CONSTANT_Integer_info {
    u1 tag;
    u4 bytes;
}

CONSTANT_Float_info {
    u1 tag;
    u4 bytes;
}

```

The items of these structures are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_Integer_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_Integer` (3).The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_Float_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_Float` (4).

- bytes

  The `bytes` item of the `CONSTANT_Integer_info` structure represents the value of the `int` constant. The bytes of the value are stored in big-endian (high byte first) order.The `bytes` item of the `CONSTANT_Float_info` structure represents the value of the `float` constant in IEEE 754 floating-point single format ([§2.3.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.2)). The bytes of the single format representation are stored in big-endian (high byte first) order.The value represented by the `CONSTANT_Float_info` structure is determined as follows. The bytes of the value are first converted into an `int` constant *bits*. Then:If *bits* is `0x7f800000`, the `float` value will be positive infinity.If *bits* is `0xff800000`, the `float` value will be negative infinity.If *bits* is in the range `0x7f800001` through `0x7fffffff` or in the range `0xff800001` through `0xffffffff`, the `float` value will be NaN.In all other cases, let `s`, `e`, and `m` be three values that might be computed from *bits*:`int s = ((*bits* >> 31) == 0) ? 1 : -1;int e = ((*bits* >> 23) & 0xff);int m = (e == 0) ?          (*bits* & 0x7fffff) << 1 :          (*bits* & 0x7fffff) | 0x800000;	  `Then the `float` value equals the result of the mathematical expression `s · m · 2e-150`.

### 4.4.5. The `CONSTANT_Long_info` and `CONSTANT_Double_info` Structures

The `CONSTANT_Long_info` and `CONSTANT_Double_info` represent 8-byte numeric (`long` and `double`) constants:

```
CONSTANT_Long_info {
    u1 tag;
    u4 high_bytes;
    u4 low_bytes;
}

CONSTANT_Double_info {
    u1 tag;
    u4 high_bytes;
    u4 low_bytes;
}

```

All 8-byte constants take up two entries in the `constant_pool` table of the `class` file. If a `CONSTANT_Long_info` or `CONSTANT_Double_info` structure is the item in the `constant_pool` table at index *n*, then the next usable item in the pool is located at index *n*+2. The `constant_pool` index *n*+1 must be valid but is considered unusable.

所有8字节常数两个条目`constant_pool`表的`class`文件。如果一个`CONSTANT_Long_info`或`CONSTANT_Double_info`结构中的项`constant_pool`表的索引* n *,然后下一个可用的条目池位于指数* n * + 2。的`constant_pool`指数* n * + 1必须是有效的,但被认为是无法使用。

In retrospect, making 8-byte constants take two constant pool entries was a poor choice.

回想起来,让8字节常数两个常量池条目是一个好的选择。

The items of these structures are as follows:

这些结构的项目如下:



- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_Long_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_Long` (5).The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_Double_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_Double` (6).

- high_bytes, low_bytes

  The unsigned `high_bytes` and `low_bytes` items of the `CONSTANT_Long_info` structure together represent the value of the `long` constant`((long) high_bytes << 32) + low_bytes      `where the bytes of each of `high_bytes` and `low_bytes` are stored in big-endian (high byte first) order.The `high_bytes` and `low_bytes` items of the `CONSTANT_Double_info` structure together represent the `double` value in IEEE 754 floating-point double format ([§2.3.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.2)). The bytes of each item are stored in big-endian (high byte first) order.The value represented by the `CONSTANT_Double_info` structure is determined as follows. The `high_bytes` and `low_bytes` items are converted into the `long` constant *bits*, which is equal to`((long) high_bytes << 32) + low_bytes      `Then:If *bits* is `0x7ff0000000000000L`, the `double` value will be positive infinity.If *bits* is `0xfff0000000000000L`, the `double` value will be negative infinity.If *bits* is in the range `0x7ff0000000000001L` through `0x7fffffffffffffffL` or in the range `0xfff0000000000001L` through `0xffffffffffffffffL`, the double value will be NaN.In all other cases, let `s`, `e`, and `m` be three values that might be computed from *bits*:`int s = ((*bits* >> 63) == 0) ? 1 : -1;int e = (int)((*bits* >> 52) & 0x7ffL);long m = (e == 0) ?           (*bits* & 0xfffffffffffffL) << 1 :           (*bits* & 0xfffffffffffffL) | 0x10000000000000L;	  `Then the floating-point value equals the `double` value of the mathematical expression `s · m · 2e-1075`.

### 4.4.6. The `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info` Structure

The `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info` structure is used to represent a field or method, without indicating which class or interface type it belongs to:

```
CONSTANT_NameAndType_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 name_index;
    u2 descriptor_index;
}

```

The items of the `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info` structure are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_NameAndType` (12).

- name_index

  The value of the `name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing either the special method name `<init>` ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)) or a valid unqualified name denoting a field or method ([§4.2.2](#jvms-4.2.2)).

- descriptor_index

  The value of the `descriptor_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a valid field descriptor or method descriptor ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2), [§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)).

### 4.4.7. The `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` Structure

The `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure is used to represent constant string values:

```
CONSTANT_Utf8_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 length;
    u1 bytes[length];
}

```

The items of the `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_Utf8` (1).

- length

  The value of the `length` item gives the number of bytes in the `bytes` array (not the length of the resulting string).

- bytes[]

  The `bytes` array contains the bytes of the string.No byte may have the value `(byte)0`.No byte may lie in the range `(byte)0xf0` to `(byte)0xff`.

String content is encoded in modified UTF-8. Modified UTF-8 strings are encoded so that code point sequences that contain only non-null ASCII characters can be represented using only 1 byte per code point, but all code points in the Unicode codespace can be represented. Modified UTF-8 strings are not null-terminated. The encoding is as follows:

- Code points in the range '`\u0001`' to '`\u007F`' are represented by a single byte:

  ​

  **Table 4.4. **

  | *0*  | *bits 6-0* |
  | ---- | ---------- |
  |      |            |

  ​

  The 7 bits of data in the byte give the value of the code point represented.

- The null code point ('`\u0000`') and code points in the range '`\u0080`' to '`\u07FF`' are represented by a pair of bytes `x` and `y` :

  ​

  **Table 4.5. **

  | `x`: | **Table 4.6. ***1**1**0**bits 10-6* |
  | ---- | ----------------------------------- |
  | `y`: | **Table 4.7. ***1**0**bits 5-0*     |

  ​

  The two bytes represent the code point with the value:

  ​

  ```
  ((x & 0x1f) << 6) + (y & 0x3f)
      
  ```

- Code points in the range '`\u0800`' to '`\uFFFF`' are represented by 3 bytes `x`, `y`, and `z` :

  ​

  **Table 4.8. **

  | `x`: | **Table 4.9. ***1**1**1**0**bits 15-12* |
  | ---- | --------------------------------------- |
  | `y`: | **Table 4.10. ***1**0**bits 11-6*       |
  | `z`: | **Table 4.11. ***1**0**bits 5-0*        |

  ​

  The three bytes represent the code point with the value:

  ​

  ```
  ((x & 0xf) << 12) + ((y & 0x3f) << 6) + (z & 0x3f)
      
  ```

- Characters with code points above U+FFFF (so-called *supplementary characters*) are represented by separately encoding the two surrogate code units of their UTF-16 representation. Each of the surrogate code units is represented by three bytes. This means supplementary characters are represented by six bytes, `u`, `v`, `w`, `x`, `y`, and `z` :

  ​

  **Table 4.12. **

  | `u`: | **Table 4.13. ***1**1**1**0**1**1**0**1* |
  | ---- | ---------------------------------------- |
  | `v`: | **Table 4.14. ***1**0**1**0**(bits 20-16)-1* |
  | `w`: | **Table 4.15. ***1**0**bits 15-10*       |
  | `x`: | **Table 4.16. ***1**1**1**0**1**1**0**1* |
  | `y`: | **Table 4.17. ***1**0**1**1**bits 9-6*   |
  | `z`: | **Table 4.18. ***1**0**bits 5-0*         |

  ​

  The six bytes represent the code point with the value:

  ​

  ```
  0x10000 + ((v & 0x0f) << 16) + ((w & 0x3f) << 10) +
  ((y & 0x0f) << 6) + (z & 0x3f)
      
  ```

The bytes of multibyte characters are stored in the `class` file in big-endian (high byte first) order.

多字节字符的字节存储在`class`文件在高位优先(高字节第一)。

There are two differences between this format and the "standard" UTF-8 format. First, the null character `(char)0` is encoded using the 2-byte format rather than the 1-byte format, so that modified UTF-8 strings never have embedded nulls. Second, only the 1-byte, 2-byte, and 3-byte formats of standard UTF-8 are used. The Java Virtual Machine does not recognize the four-byte format of standard UTF-8; it uses its own two-times-three-byte format instead.

有两个这种格式之间的差异和“标准”utf - 8格式。首先,null字符`(char)0`是使用2字节格式进行编码,而不是字节格式,以便修改utf - 8编码的字符串没有嵌入式取消.第二,只有字节,2字节和3字节格式的标准使用utf - 8.Java虚拟机不承认四字节格式标准的utf - 8;它使用自己的two-times-three-byte格式。

For more information regarding the standard UTF-8 format, see Section 3.9 *Unicode Encoding Forms* of *The Unicode Standard, Version 6.0.0*.

关于标准的utf - 8格式的更多信息,参见3.9节* Unicode编码形式* *的Unicode标准,0版本*。

### 4.4.8. The `CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info` Structure

### 4.4.8。的`CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info`结构

The `CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info` structure is used to represent a method handle:

的`CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info`结构是用来表示一种方法处理:



```
CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info {
    u1 tag;
    u1 reference_kind;
    u2 reference_index;
}

```

The items of the `CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info` structure are the following:

- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_MethodHandle` (15).

- reference_kind

  The value of the `reference_kind` item must be in the range 1 to 9. The value denotes the *kind* of this method handle, which characterizes its bytecode behavior ([§5.4.3.5](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-5.html#jvms-5.4.3.5)).

- reference_index

  The value of the `reference_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be as follows:If the value of the `reference_kind` item is 1 (`REF_getField`), 2 (`REF_getStatic`), 3 (`REF_putField`), or 4 (`REF_putStatic`), then the `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a`CONSTANT_Fieldref_info` ([§4.4.2](#jvms-4.4.2)) structure representing a field for which a method handle is to be created.If the value of the `reference_kind` item is 5 (`REF_invokeVirtual`) or 8 (`REF_newInvokeSpecial`), then the `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a`CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure ([§4.4.2](#jvms-4.4.2)) representing a class's method or constructor ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)) for which a method handle is to be created.If the value of the `reference_kind` item is 6 (`REF_invokeStatic`) or 7 (`REF_invokeSpecial`), then if the `class` file version number is less than 52.0, the `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure representing a class's method for which a method handle is to be created; if the `class` file version number is 52.0 or above, the `constant_pool` entry at that index must be either a `CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure or a `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info` structure ([§4.4.2](#jvms-4.4.2)) representing a class's or interface's method for which a method handle is to be created.If the value of the `reference_kind` item is 9 (`REF_invokeInterface`), then the `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info` structure representing an interface's method for which a method handle is to be created.If the value of the `reference_kind` item is 5 (`REF_invokeVirtual`), 6 (`REF_invokeStatic`), 7 (`REF_invokeSpecial`), or 9 (`REF_invokeInterface`), the name of the method represented by a `CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure or a `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref_info` structure must not be `<init>` or `<clinit>`.If the value is 8 (`REF_newInvokeSpecial`), the name of the method represented by a `CONSTANT_Methodref_info` structure must be `<init>`.

### 4.4.9. The `CONSTANT_MethodType_info` Structure

The `CONSTANT_MethodType_info` structure is used to represent a method type:

```
CONSTANT_MethodType_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 descriptor_index;
}

```

The items of the `CONSTANT_MethodType_info` structure are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_MethodType_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_MethodType` (16).

- descriptor_index

  The value of the `descriptor_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)).

### 4.4.10. The `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info` Structure

### 4.4.10。的`CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info`结构

The `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info` structure is used by an *invokedynamic* instruction ([§*invokedynamic*](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5.invokedynamic)) to specify a bootstrap method, the dynamic invocation name, the argument and return types of the call, and optionally, a sequence of additional constants called *static arguments* to the bootstrap method.

的`CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info`结构被一个* * invokedynamic指令((§* invokedynamic *)(https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms # jvm - 6.5 - 6. - html.invokedynamic)指定一个引导方法,动态调用的名称,参数和返回类型的调用,并可选地,一系列的附加常量称为* *引导方法静态参数。



```
CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info {
    u1 tag;
    u2 bootstrap_method_attr_index;
    u2 name_and_type_index;
}

```

The items of the `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info` structure are as follows:

- tag

  The `tag` item of the `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info` structure has the value `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic` (18).

- bootstrap_method_attr_index

  The value of the `bootstrap_method_attr_index` item must be a valid index into the `bootstrap_methods` array of the bootstrap method table ([§4.7.23](#jvms-4.7.23)) of this `class` file.

- name_and_type_index

  The value of the `name_and_type_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info`structure ([§4.4.6](#jvms-4.4.6)) representing a method name and method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)). 

  ​