
### 4.7.10. The `SourceFile` Attribute

The `SourceFile` attribute is an optional fixed-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)).

There may be at most one `SourceFile` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure.

The `SourceFile` attribute has the following format:

```
SourceFile_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 sourcefile_index;
}

```

The items of the `SourceFile_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`SourceFile`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item of a `SourceFile_attribute` structure must be two.

- sourcefile_index

  The value of the `sourcefile_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a string.The string referenced by the `sourcefile_index` item will be interpreted as indicating the name of the source file from which this `class` file was compiled. It will not be interpreted as indicating the name of a directory containing the file or an absolute path name for the file; such platform-specific additional information must be supplied by the run-time interpreter or development tool at the time the file name is actually used.

### 4.7.11. The `SourceDebugExtension` Attribute

The `SourceDebugExtension` attribute is an optional attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)).

There may be at most one `SourceDebugExtension` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure.

The `SourceDebugExtension` attribute has the following format:

```
SourceDebugExtension_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u1 debug_extension[attribute_length];
}

```

The items of the `SourceDebugExtension_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`SourceDebugExtension`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- debug_extension[]

  The `debug_extension` array holds extended debugging information which has no semantic effect on the Java Virtual Machine. The information is represented using a modified UTF-8 string ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) with no terminating zero byte.Note that the `debug_extension` array may denote a string longer than that which can be represented with an instance of class `String`.

### 4.7.12. The `LineNumberTable` Attribute

The `LineNumberTable` attribute is an optional variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). It may be used by debuggers to determine which part of the `code` array corresponds to a given line number in the original source file.

If multiple `LineNumberTable` attributes are present in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute, then they may appear in any order.

There may be more than one `LineNumberTable` attribute *per line of a source file* in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute. That is, `LineNumberTable` attributes may together represent a given line of a source file, and need not be one-to-one with source lines.

The `LineNumberTable` attribute has the following format:

```
LineNumberTable_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 line_number_table_length;
    {   u2 start_pc;
        u2 line_number;	
    } line_number_table[line_number_table_length];
}

```

The items of the `LineNumberTable_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`LineNumberTable`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- line_number_table_length

  The value of the `line_number_table_length` item indicates the number of entries in the `line_number_table` array.

- line_number_table[]

  Each entry in the `line_number_table` array indicates that the line number in the original source file changes at a given point in the `code` array. Each `line_number_table` entry must contain the following two items:start_pcThe value of the `start_pc` item must indicate the index into the `code` array at which the code for a new line in the original source file begins.The value of `start_pc` must be less than the value of the `code_length` item of the `Code` attribute of which this `LineNumberTable` is an attribute.line_numberThe value of the `line_number` item must give the corresponding line number in the original source file.

### 4.7.13. The `LocalVariableTable` Attribute

The `LocalVariableTable` attribute is an optional variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). It may be used by debuggers to determine the value of a given local variable during the execution of a method.

If multiple `LocalVariableTable` attributes are present in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute, then they may appear in any order.

There may be no more than one `LocalVariableTable` attribute *per local variable* in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute.

The `LocalVariableTable` attribute has the following format:

```
LocalVariableTable_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 local_variable_table_length;
    {   u2 start_pc;
        u2 length;
        u2 name_index;
        u2 descriptor_index;
        u2 index;
    } local_variable_table[local_variable_table_length];
}

```

The items of the `LocalVariableTable_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`LocalVariableTable`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- local_variable_table_length

  The value of the `local_variable_table_length` item indicates the number of entries in the `local_variable_table` array.

- local_variable_table[]

  Each entry in the `local_variable_table` array indicates a range of `code` array offsets within which a local variable has a value. It also indicates the index into the local variable array of the current frame at which that local variable can be found. Each entry must contain the following five items:start_pc, lengthThe given local variable must have a value at indices into the `code` array in the interval [`start_pc`, `start_pc + length`), that is, between `start_pc` inclusive and `start_pc + length` exclusive.The value of `start_pc` must be a valid index into the `code` array of this `Code` attribute and must be the index of the opcode of an instruction.The value of `start_pc + length` must either be a valid index into the `code` array of this `Code` attribute and be the index of the opcode of an instruction, or it must be the first index beyond the end of that `code` array.name_indexThe value of the `name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must contain a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a valid unqualified name denoting a local variable ([§4.2.2](#jvms-4.2.2)).descriptor_indexThe value of the `descriptor_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must contain a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info`structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a field descriptor which encodes the type of a local variable in the source program ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2)).indexThe given local variable must be at `index` in the local variable array of the current frame.If the local variable at `index` is of type `double` or `long`, it occupies both `index` and `index + 1`.

### 4.7.14. The `LocalVariableTypeTable` Attribute

The `LocalVariableTypeTable` attribute is an optional variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). It may be used by debuggers to determine the value of a given local variable during the execution of a method.

If multiple `LocalVariableTypeTable` attributes are present in the `attributes` table of a given `Code` attribute, then they may appear in any order.

There may be no more than one `LocalVariableTypeTable` attribute *per local variable* in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute.

The `LocalVariableTypeTable` attribute differs from the `LocalVariableTable` attribute ([§4.7.13](#jvms-4.7.13)) in that it provides signature information rather than descriptor information. This difference is only significant for variables whose type uses a type variable or parameterized type. Such variables will appear in both tables, while variables of other types will appear only in `LocalVariableTable`.

The `LocalVariableTypeTable` attribute has the following format:

```
LocalVariableTypeTable_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 local_variable_type_table_length;
    {   u2 start_pc;
        u2 length;
        u2 name_index;
        u2 signature_index;
        u2 index;
    } local_variable_type_table[local_variable_type_table_length];
}

```

The items of the `LocalVariableTypeTable_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`LocalVariableTypeTable`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- local_variable_type_table_length

  The value of the `local_variable_type_table_length` item indicates the number of entries in the `local_variable_type_table` array.

- local_variable_type_table[]

  Each entry in the `local_variable_type_table` array indicates a range of `code` array offsets within which a local variable has a value. It also indicates the index into the local variable array of the current frame at which that local variable can be found. Each entry must contain the following five items:start_pc, lengthThe given local variable must have a value at indices into the `code` array in the interval [`start_pc`, `start_pc + length`), that is, between `start_pc` inclusive and `start_pc + length` exclusive.The value of `start_pc` must be a valid index into the `code` array of this `Code` attribute and must be the index of the opcode of an instruction.The value of `start_pc + length` must either be a valid index into the `code` array of this `Code` attribute and be the index of the opcode of an instruction, or it must be the first index beyond the end of that `code` array.name_indexThe value of the `name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must contain a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a valid unqualified name denoting a local variable ([§4.2.2](#jvms-4.2.2)).signature_indexThe value of the `signature_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must contain a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info`structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a field signature which encodes the type of a local variable in the source program ([§4.7.9.1](#jvms-4.7.9.1)).indexThe given local variable must be at `index` in the local variable array of the current frame.If the local variable at `index` is of type `double` or `long`, it occupies both `index` and `index + 1`.

### 4.7.15. The `Deprecated` Attribute

The `Deprecated` attribute is an optional fixed-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1), [§4.5](#jvms-4.5), [§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). A class, interface, method, or field may be marked using a `Deprecated` attribute to indicate that the class, interface, method, or field has been superseded.

A run-time interpreter or tool that reads the `class` file format, such as a compiler, can use this marking to advise the user that a superseded class, interface, method, or field is being referred to. The presence of a `Deprecated` attribute does not alter the semantics of a class or interface.

The `Deprecated` attribute has the following format:

```
Deprecated_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
}

```

The items of the `Deprecated_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`Deprecated`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item must be zero.

### 4.7.16. The `RuntimeVisibleAnnotations` Attribute

The `RuntimeVisibleAnnotations` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1), [§4.5](#jvms-4.5), [§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). The`RuntimeVisibleAnnotations` attribute records run-time visible annotations on the declaration of the corresponding class, field, or method. The Java Virtual Machine must make these annotations available so they can be returned by the appropriate reflective APIs.

There may be at most one `RuntimeVisibleAnnotations` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure.

The `RuntimeVisibleAnnotations` attribute has the following format:

```
RuntimeVisibleAnnotations_attribute {
    u2         attribute_name_index;
    u4         attribute_length;
    u2         num_annotations;
    annotation annotations[num_annotations];
}

```

The items of the `RuntimeVisibleAnnotations_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`RuntimeVisibleAnnotations`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- num_annotations

  The value of the `num_annotations` item gives the number of run-time visible annotations represented by the structure.

- annotations[]

  Each entry in the `annotations` table represents a single run-time visible annotation on a declaration. The `annotation` structure has the following format:`annotation {    u2 type_index;    u2 num_element_value_pairs;    {   u2            element_name_index;        element_value value;    } element_value_pairs[num_element_value_pairs];}      `The items of the `annotation` structure are as follows:type_indexThe value of the `type_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a field descriptor ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2)). The field descriptor denotes the type of the annotation represented by this `annotation` structure.num_element_value_pairsThe value of the `num_element_value_pairs` item gives the number of element-value pairs of the annotation represented by this `annotation` structure.element_value_pairs[]Each value of the `element_value_pairs` table represents a single element-value pair in the annotation represented by this `annotation` structure. Each `element_value_pairs` entry contains the following two items:element_name_indexThe value of the `element_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a`CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)). The `constant_pool` entry denotes the name of the element of the element-value pair represented by this `element_value_pairs` entry.In other words, the entry denotes an element of the annotation type specified by `type_index`.valueThe value of the `value` item represents the value of the element-value pair represented by this `element_value_pairs` entry.

#### 4.7.16.1. The `element_value` structure

The `element_value` structure is a discriminated union representing the value of an element-value pair. It has the following format:

```
element_value {
    u1 tag;
    union {
        u2 const_value_index;

        {   u2 type_name_index;
            u2 const_name_index;
        } enum_const_value;

        u2 class_info_index;

        annotation annotation_value;

        {   u2            num_values;
            element_value values[num_values];
        } array_value;
    } value;
}

```

The `tag` item uses a single ASCII character to indicate the type of the value of the element-value pair. This determines which item of the `value` union is in use. [Table 4.7.16.1-A](#jvms-4.7.16.1-130) shows the valid characters for the `tag` item, the type indicated by each character, and the item used in the `value` union for each character. The table's fourth column is used in the description below of one item of the `value` union.

**Table 4.7.16.1-A. Interpretation of tag values as types**

| `tag` Item | Type            | `value` Item        | Constant Type      |
| ---------- | --------------- | ------------------- | ------------------ |
| `B`        | `byte`          | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Integer` |
| `C`        | `char`          | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Integer` |
| `D`        | `double`        | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Double`  |
| `F`        | `float`         | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Float`   |
| `I`        | `int`           | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Integer` |
| `J`        | `long`          | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Long`    |
| `S`        | `short`         | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Integer` |
| `Z`        | `boolean`       | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Integer` |
| `s`        | `String`        | `const_value_index` | `CONSTANT_Utf8`    |
| `e`        | Enum type       | `enum_const_value`  | *Not applicable*   |
| `c`        | `Class`         | `class_info_index`  | *Not applicable*   |
| `@`        | Annotation type | `annotation_value`  | *Not applicable*   |
| `[`        | Array type      | `array_value`       | *Not applicable*   |

The `value` item represents the value of an element-value pair. The item is a union, whose own items are as follows:

- const_value_index

  The `const_value_index` item denotes either a primitive constant value or a `String` literal as the value of this element-value pair.The value of the `const_value_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be of a type appropriate to the `tag`item, as specified in the fourth column of [Table 4.7.16.1-A](#jvms-4.7.16.1-130).

- enum_const_value

  The `enum_const_value` item denotes an enum constant as the value of this element-value pair.The `enum_const_value` item consists of the following two items:type_name_indexThe value of the `type_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info`structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a field descriptor ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2)). The `constant_pool` entry gives the internal form of the binary name of the type of the enum constant represented by this `element_value` structure ([§4.2.1](#jvms-4.2.1)).const_name_indexThe value of the `const_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info`structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)). The `constant_pool` entry gives the simple name of the enum constant represented by this `element_value` structure.

- class_info_index

  The `class_info_index` item denotes a class literal as the value of this element-value pair.The `class_info_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a return descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)). The return descriptor gives the type corresponding to the class literal represented by this `element_value` structure. Types correspond to class literals as follows:For a class literal C`.``class`, where C is the name of a class, interface, or array type, the corresponding type is C. The return descriptor in the `constant_pool` will be an *ObjectType* or an *ArrayType*.For a class literal p`.``class`, where p is the name of a primitive type, the corresponding type is p. The return descriptor in the `constant_pool` will be a *BaseType* character.For a class literal `void``.``class`, the corresponding type is `void`. The return descriptor in the `constant_pool` will be *V*.For example, the class literal `Object.class` corresponds to the type `Object`, so the `constant_pool` entry is `Ljava/lang/Object;`, whereas the class literal `int.class` corresponds to the type `int`, so the `constant_pool` entry is `I`.The class literal `void.class` corresponds to `void`, so the `constant_pool` entry is *V*, whereas the class literal `Void.class` corresponds to the type `Void`, so the `constant_pool` entry is `Ljava/lang/Void;`.

- annotation_value

  The `annotation_value` item denotes a "nested" annotation as the value of this element-value pair.The value of the `annotation_value` item is an `annotation` structure ([§4.7.16](#jvms-4.7.16)) that gives the annotation represented by this `element_value` structure.

- array_value

  The `array_value` item denotes an array as the value of this element-value pair.The `array_value` item consists of the following two items:num_valuesThe value of the `num_values` item gives the number of elements in the array represented by this `element_value` structure.values[]Each value in the `values` table gives the corresponding element of the array represented by this `element_value` structure.
