### 4.7.4. The `StackMapTable` Attribute

The `StackMapTable` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). A `StackMapTable` attribute is used during the process of verification by type checking ([§4.10.1](#jvms-4.10.1)).

There may be at most one `StackMapTable` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute.

In a `class` file whose version number is 50.0 or above, if a method's `Code` attribute does not have a `StackMapTable` attribute, it has an *implicit stack map attribute* ([§4.10.1](#jvms-4.10.1)). This implicit stack map attribute is equivalent to a `StackMapTable` attribute with `number_of_entries` equal to zero.

The `StackMapTable` attribute has the following format:

```
StackMapTable_attribute {
    u2              attribute_name_index;
    u4              attribute_length;
    u2              number_of_entries;
    stack_map_frame entries[number_of_entries];
}

```

The items of the `StackMapTable_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`StackMapTable`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- number_of_entries

  The value of the `number_of_entries` item gives the number of `stack_map_frame` entries in the `entries` table.

- entries[]

  Each entry in the `entries` table describes one stack map frame of the method. The order of the stack map frames in the `entries` table is significant.

A *stack map frame* specifies (either explicitly or implicitly) the bytecode offset at which it applies, and the verification types of local variables and operand stack entries for that offset.

Each stack map frame described in the `entries` table relies on the previous frame for some of its semantics. The first stack map frame of a method is implicit, and computed from the method descriptor by the type checker ([§4.10.1.6](#jvms-4.10.1.6)). The `stack_map_frame` structure at `entries[0]` therefore describes the second stack map frame of the method.

The *bytecode offset* at which a stack map frame applies is calculated by taking the value `offset_delta` specified in the frame (either explicitly or implicitly), and adding `offset_delta + 1` to the bytecode offset of the previous frame, unless the previous frame is the initial frame of the method. In that case, the bytecode offset at which the stack map frame applies is the value `offset_delta` specified in the frame.

By using an offset delta rather than storing the actual bytecode offset, we ensure, by definition, that stack map frames are in the correctly sorted order. Furthermore, by consistently using the formula `offset_delta + 1` for all explicit frames (as opposed to the implicit first frame), we guarantee the absence of duplicates.

We say that an instruction in the bytecode has a *corresponding stack map frame* if the instruction starts at offset *i* in the `code` array of a `Code` attribute, and the `Code` attribute has a`StackMapTable` attribute whose `entries` array contains a stack map frame that applies at bytecode offset *i*.

A *verification type* specifies the type of either one or two locations, where a *location* is either a single local variable or a single operand stack entry. A verification type is represented by a discriminated union, `verification_type_info`, that consists of a one-byte tag, indicating which item of the union is in use, followed by zero or more bytes, giving more information about the tag.

```
union verification_type_info {
    Top_variable_info;
    Integer_variable_info;
    Float_variable_info;
    Long_variable_info;
    Double_variable_info;
    Null_variable_info;
    UninitializedThis_variable_info;
    Object_variable_info;
    Uninitialized_variable_info;
}

```

A verification type that specifies one location in the local variable array or in the operand stack is represented by the following items of the `verification_type_info` union:

- The `Top_variable_info` item indicates that the local variable has the verification type `top`.

  ​

  ```
  Top_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Top; /* 0 */
  }
      
  ```

- The `Integer_variable_info` item indicates that the location has the verification type `int`.

  ​

  ```
  Integer_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Integer; /* 1 */
  }
      
  ```

- The `Float_variable_info` item indicates that the location has the verification type `float`.

  ​

  ```
  Float_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Float; /* 2 */
  }
      
  ```

- The `Null_variable_info` type indicates that the location has the verification type `null`.

  ​

  ```
  Null_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Null; /* 5 */
  }
      
  ```

- The `UninitializedThis_variable_info` item indicates that the location has the verification type `uninitializedThis`.

  ​

  ```
  UninitializedThis_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_UninitializedThis; /* 6 */
  }
      
  ```

- The `Object_variable_info` item indicates that the location has the verification type which is the class represented by the `CONSTANT_Class_info` structure ([§4.4.1](#jvms-4.4.1)) found in the `constant_pool` table at the index given by `cpool_index`.

  ​

  ```
  Object_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Object; /* 7 */
      u2 cpool_index;
  }
      
  ```

- The `Uninitialized_variable_info` item indicates that the location has the verification type `uninitialized(Offset)`. The `Offset` item indicates the offset, in the `code` array of the `Code` attribute that contains this `StackMapTable` attribute, of the *new* instruction ([§*new*](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5.new)) that created the object being stored in the location.

  ​

  ```
  Uninitialized_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Uninitialized; /* 8 */
      u2 offset;
  }
      
  ```

A verification type that specifies two locations in the local variable array or in the operand stack is represented by the following items of the `verification_type_info` union:

- The `Long_variable_info` item indicates that the first of two locations has the verification type `long`.

  ​

  ```
  Long_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Long; /* 4 */
  }
      
  ```

- The `Double_variable_info` item indicates that the first of two locations has the verification type `double`.

  ​

  ```
  Double_variable_info {
      u1 tag = ITEM_Double; /* 3 */
  }
      
  ```

- The `Long_variable_info` and `Double_variable_info` items indicate the verification type of the second of two locations as follows:

  - If the first of the two locations is a local variable, then:
    - It must not be the local variable with the highest index.
    - The next higher numbered local variable has the verification type `top`.
  - If the first of the two locations is an operand stack entry, then:
    - It must not be the topmost location of the operand stack.
    - The next location closer to the top of the operand stack has the verification type `top`.

A stack map frame is represented by a discriminated union, `stack_map_frame`, which consists of a one-byte tag, indicating which item of the union is in use, followed by zero or more bytes, giving more information about the tag.

```
union stack_map_frame {
    same_frame;
    same_locals_1_stack_item_frame;
    same_locals_1_stack_item_frame_extended;
    chop_frame;
    same_frame_extended;
    append_frame;
    full_frame;
}

```

The tag indicates the *frame type* of the stack map frame:

- The frame type `same_frame` is represented by tags in the range [0-63]. This frame type indicates that the frame has exactly the same local variables as the previous frame and that the operand stack is empty. The `offset_delta` value for the frame is the value of the tag item, `frame_type`.

  ​

  ```
  same_frame {
      u1 frame_type = SAME; /* 0-63 */
  }
      
  ```

- The frame type `same_locals_1_stack_item_frame` is represented by tags in the range [64, 127]. This frame type indicates that the frame has exactly the same local variables as the previous frame and that the operand stack has one entry. The `offset_delta` value for the frame is given by the formula `frame_type - 64`. The verification type of the one stack entry appears after the frame type.

  ​

  ```
  same_locals_1_stack_item_frame {
      u1 frame_type = SAME_LOCALS_1_STACK_ITEM; /* 64-127 */
      verification_type_info stack[1];
  }

  ```

- Tags in the range [128-246] are reserved for future use.

- The frame type `same_locals_1_stack_item_frame_extended` is represented by the tag 247. This frame type indicates that the frame has exactly the same local variables as the previous frame and that the operand stack has one entry. The `offset_delta` value for the frame is given explicitly, unlike in the frame type `same_locals_1_stack_item_frame`. The verification type of the one stack entry appears after `offset_delta`.

  ​

  ```
  same_locals_1_stack_item_frame_extended {
      u1 frame_type = SAME_LOCALS_1_STACK_ITEM_EXTENDED; /* 247 */
      u2 offset_delta;
      verification_type_info stack[1];
  }
      
  ```

- The frame type `chop_frame` is represented by tags in the range [248-250]. This frame type indicates that the frame has the same local variables as the previous frame except that the last *k* local variables are absent, and that the operand stack is empty. The value of *k* is given by the formula `251 - frame_type`. The `offset_delta` value for the frame is given explicitly.

  ​

  ```
  chop_frame {
      u1 frame_type = CHOP; /* 248-250 */
      u2 offset_delta;
  }
      
  ```

  Assume the verification types of local variables in the previous frame are given by `locals`, an array structured as in the `full_frame` frame type. If `locals[M-1]` in the previous frame represented local variable X and `locals[M]` represented local variable Y, then the effect of removing one local variable is that `locals[M-1]` in the new frame represents local variable X and `locals[M]` is undefined.

  It is an error if *k* is larger than the number of local variables in `locals` for the previous frame, that is, if the number of local variables in the new frame would be less than zero.

- The frame type `same_frame_extended` is represented by the tag 251. This frame type indicates that the frame has exactly the same local variables as the previous frame and that the operand stack is empty. The `offset_delta` value for the frame is given explicitly, unlike in the frame type `same_frame`.

  ​

  ```
  same_frame_extended {
      u1 frame_type = SAME_FRAME_EXTENDED; /* 251 */
      u2 offset_delta;
  }
     
  ```

- The frame type `append_frame` is represented by tags in the range [252-254]. This frame type indicates that the frame has the same locals as the previous frame except that *k*additional locals are defined, and that the operand stack is empty. The value of *k* is given by the formula `frame_type - 251`. The `offset_delta` value for the frame is given explicitly.

  ​

  ```
  append_frame {
      u1 frame_type = APPEND; /* 252-254 */
      u2 offset_delta;
      verification_type_info locals[frame_type - 251];
  }
      
  ```

  The 0th entry in `locals` represents the verification type of the first additional local variable. If `locals[M]` represents local variable `N`, then:

  - `locals[M+1]` represents local variable `N+1` if `locals[M]` is one of `Top_variable_info`, `Integer_variable_info`, `Float_variable_info`, `Null_variable_info`,`UninitializedThis_variable_info`, `Object_variable_info`, or `Uninitialized_variable_info`; and
  - `locals[M+1]` represents local variable `N+2` if `locals[M]` is either `Long_variable_info` or `Double_variable_info`.

  It is an error if, for any index *i*, `locals[*i*]` represents a local variable whose index is greater than the maximum number of local variables for the method.

- The frame type `full_frame` is represented by the tag 255. The `offset_delta` value for the frame is given explicitly.

  ​

  ```
  full_frame {
      u1 frame_type = FULL_FRAME; /* 255 */
      u2 offset_delta;
      u2 number_of_locals;
      verification_type_info locals[number_of_locals];
      u2 number_of_stack_items;
      verification_type_info stack[number_of_stack_items];
  }
      
  ```

  The 0th entry in `locals` represents the verification type of local variable 0. If `locals[M]` represents local variable `N`, then:

  - `locals[M+1]` represents local variable `N+1` if `locals[M]` is one of `Top_variable_info`, `Integer_variable_info`, `Float_variable_info`, `Null_variable_info`,`UninitializedThis_variable_info`, `Object_variable_info`, or `Uninitialized_variable_info`; and
  - `locals[M+1]` represents local variable `N+2` if `locals[M]` is either `Long_variable_info` or `Double_variable_info`.

  It is an error if, for any index *i*, `locals[*i*]` represents a local variable whose index is greater than the maximum number of local variables for the method.

  The 0th entry in `stack` represents the verification type of the bottom of the operand stack, and subsequent entries in `stack` represent the verification types of stack entries closer to the top of the operand stack. We refer to the bottom of the operand stack as stack entry 0, and to subsequent entries of the operand stack as stack entry 1, 2, etc. If `stack[M]`represents stack entry `N`, then:

  - `stack[M+1]` represents stack entry `N+1` if `stack[M]` is one of `Top_variable_info`, `Integer_variable_info`, `Float_variable_info`, `Null_variable_info`, `UninitializedThis_variable_info`, `Object_variable_info`, or `Uninitialized_variable_info`; and
  - `stack[M+1]` represents stack entry `N+2` if `stack[M]` is either `Long_variable_info` or `Double_variable_info`.

  It is an error if, for any index *i*, `stack[*i*]` represents a stack entry whose index is greater than the maximum operand stack size for the method.

