
### 4.7.5. The `Exceptions` Attribute

The `Exceptions` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure ([§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). The `Exceptions` attribute indicates which checked exceptions a method may throw.

There may be at most one `Exceptions` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure.

The `Exceptions` attribute has the following format:

```
Exceptions_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 number_of_exceptions;
    u2 exception_index_table[number_of_exceptions];
}

```

The items of the `Exceptions_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be the `CONSTANT_Utf8_info`structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`Exceptions`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the attribute length, excluding the initial six bytes.

- number_of_exceptions

  The value of the `number_of_exceptions` item indicates the number of entries in the `exception_index_table`.

- exception_index_table[]

  Each value in the `exception_index_table` array must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Class_info`structure ([§4.4.1](#jvms-4.4.1)) representing a class type that this method is declared to throw.

A method should throw an exception only if at least one of the following three criteria is met:

- The exception is an instance of `RuntimeException` or one of its subclasses.
- The exception is an instance of `Error` or one of its subclasses.
- The exception is an instance of one of the exception classes specified in the `exception_index_table` just described, or one of their subclasses.

These requirements are not enforced in the Java Virtual Machine; they are enforced only at compile time.

### 4.7.6. The `InnerClasses` Attribute

The `InnerClasses` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)).

If the constant pool of a class or interface C contains at least one `CONSTANT_Class_info` entry ([§4.4.1](#jvms-4.4.1)) which represents a class or interface that is not a member of a package, then there must be exactly one `InnerClasses` attribute in the `attributes` table of the `ClassFile` structure for C.

The `InnerClasses` attribute has the following format:

```
InnerClasses_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 number_of_classes;
    {   u2 inner_class_info_index;
        u2 outer_class_info_index;
        u2 inner_name_index;
        u2 inner_class_access_flags;
    } classes[number_of_classes];
}

```

The items of the `InnerClasses_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`InnerClasses`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- number_of_classes

  The value of the `number_of_classes` item indicates the number of entries in the `classes` array.

- classes[]

  Every `CONSTANT_Class_info` entry in the `constant_pool` table which represents a class or interface C that is not a package member must have exactly one corresponding entry in the `classes` array.If a class or interface has members that are classes or interfaces, its `constant_pool` table (and hence its `InnerClasses` attribute) must refer to each such member (JLS §13.1), even if that member is not otherwise mentioned by the class.In addition, the `constant_pool` table of every nested class and nested interface must refer to its enclosing class, so altogether, every nested class and nested interface will have `InnerClasses` information for each enclosing class and for each of its own nested classes and interfaces.Each entry in the `classes` array contains the following four items:inner_class_info_indexThe value of the `inner_class_info_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a`CONSTANT_Class_info` structure representing C. The remaining items in the `classes` array entry give information about C.outer_class_info_indexIf C is not a member of a class or an interface (that is, if C is a top-level class or interface (JLS §7.6) or a local class (JLS §14.3) or an anonymous class (JLS §15.9.5)), the value of the `outer_class_info_index` item must be zero.Otherwise, the value of the `outer_class_info_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table, and the entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Class_info`structure representing the class or interface of which C is a member.inner_name_indexIf C is anonymous (JLS §15.9.5), the value of the `inner_name_index` item must be zero.Otherwise, the value of the `inner_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table, and the entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info`structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) that represents the original simple name of C, as given in the source code from which this `class` file was compiled.inner_class_access_flagsThe value of the `inner_class_access_flags` item is a mask of flags used to denote access permissions to and properties of class or interface C as declared in the source code from which this `class` file was compiled. It is used by a compiler to recover the original information when source code is not available. The flags are specified in [Table 4.7.6-A](#jvms-4.7.6-300-D.1-D.1).**Table 4.7.6-A. Nested class access and property flags**Flag NameValueInterpretation`ACC_PUBLIC`0x0001Marked or implicitly `public` in source.`ACC_PRIVATE`0x0002Marked `private` in source.`ACC_PROTECTED`0x0004Marked `protected` in source.`ACC_STATIC`0x0008Marked or implicitly `static` in source.`ACC_FINAL`0x0010Marked `final` in source.`ACC_INTERFACE`0x0200Was an `interface` in source.`ACC_ABSTRACT`0x0400Marked or implicitly `abstract` in source.`ACC_SYNTHETIC`0x1000Declared synthetic; not present in the source code.`ACC_ANNOTATION`0x2000Declared as an annotation type.`ACC_ENUM`0x4000Declared as an `enum` type.All bits of the `inner_class_access_flags` item not assigned in [Table 4.7.6-A](#jvms-4.7.6-300-D.1-D.1) are reserved for future use. They should be set to zero in generated `class` files and should be ignored by Java Virtual Machine implementations.If a `class` file has a version number that is 51.0 or above, and has an `InnerClasses` attribute in its `attributes` table, then for all entries in the `classes` array of the `InnerClasses`attribute, the value of the `outer_class_info_index` item must be zero if the value of the `inner_name_index` item is zero.

Oracle's Java Virtual Machine implementation does not check the consistency of an `InnerClasses` attribute against a `class` file representing a class or interface referenced by the attribute.

### 4.7.7. The `EnclosingMethod` Attribute

The `EnclosingMethod` attribute is a fixed-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)). A class must have an `EnclosingMethod` attribute if and only if it represents a local class or an anonymous class (JLS §14.3, JLS §15.9.5).

There may be at most one `EnclosingMethod` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure.

The `EnclosingMethod` attribute has the following format:

```
EnclosingMethod_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 class_index;
    u2 method_index;
}

```

The items of the `EnclosingMethod_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`EnclosingMethod`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item must be four.

- class_index

  The value of the `class_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Class_info` structure ([§4.4.1](#jvms-4.4.1)) representing the innermost class that encloses the declaration of the current class.

- method_index

  If the current class is not immediately enclosed by a method or constructor, then the value of the `method_index` item must be zero.In particular, `method_index` must be zero if the current class was immediately enclosed in source code by an instance initializer, static initializer, instance variable initializer, or class variable initializer. (The first two concern both local classes and anonymous classes, while the last two concern anonymous classes declared on the right hand side of a field assignment.)Otherwise, the value of the `method_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info`structure ([§4.4.6](#jvms-4.4.6)) representing the name and type of a method in the class referenced by the `class_index` attribute above.It is the responsibility of a Java compiler to ensure that the method identified via the `method_index` is indeed the closest lexically enclosing method of the class that contains this`EnclosingMethod` attribute.

### 4.7.8. The `Synthetic` Attribute

The `Synthetic` attribute is a fixed-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1), [§4.5](#jvms-4.5), [§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). A class member that does not appear in the source code must be marked using a `Synthetic` attribute, or else it must have its `ACC_SYNTHETIC` flag set. The only exceptions to this requirement are compiler-generated methods which are not considered implementation artifacts, namely the instance initialization method representing a default constructor of the Java programming language ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)), the class initialization method ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)), and the `Enum.values()` and `Enum.valueOf()` methods.

The `Synthetic` attribute was introduced in JDK 1.1 to support nested classes and interfaces.

The `Synthetic` attribute has the following format:

```
Synthetic_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
}

```

The items of the `Synthetic_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`Synthetic`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item must be zero.

### 4.7.9. The `Signature` Attribute

The `Signature` attribute is a fixed-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1), [§4.5](#jvms-4.5), [§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). A `Signature` attribute records a signature ([§4.7.9.1](#jvms-4.7.9.1)) for a class, interface, constructor, method, or field whose declaration in the Java programming language uses type variables or parameterized types. See *The Java Language Specification, Java SE 8 Edition* for details about these types.

The `Signature` attribute has the following format:

```
Signature_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 signature_index;
}

```

The items of the `Signature_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`Signature`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item of a `Signature_attribute` structure must be two.

- signature_index

  The value of the `signature_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing a class signature if this `Signature` attribute is an attribute of a `ClassFile` structure; a method signature if this `Signature` attribute is an attribute of a `method_info` structure; or a field signature otherwise.

Oracle's Java Virtual Machine implementation does not check the well-formedness of `Signature` attributes during class loading or linking. Instead, `Signature` attributes are checked by methods of the Java SE platform class libraries which expose generic signatures of classes, interfaces, constructors, methods, and fields. Examples include `getGenericSuperclass` in `Class` and `toGenericString` in `java.lang.reflect.Executable`.

#### 4.7.9.1. Signatures

*Signatures* encode declarations written in the Java programming language that use types outside the type system of the Java Virtual Machine. They support reflection and debugging, as well as compilation when only `class` files are available.

A Java compiler must emit a signature for any class, interface, constructor, method, or field whose declaration uses type variables or parameterized types. Specifically, a Java compiler must emit:

- A class signature for any class or interface declaration which is either generic, or has a parameterized type as a superclass or superinterface, or both.

- A method signature for any method or constructor declaration which is either generic, or has a type variable or parameterized type as the return type or a formal parameter type, or has a type variable in a `throws` clause, or any combination thereof.

  If the `throws` clause of a method or constructor declaration does not involve type variables, then a compiler may treat the declaration as having no `throws` clause for the purpose of emitting a method signature.

- A field signature for any field, formal parameter, or local variable declaration whose type uses a type variable or a parameterized type.

Signatures are specified using a grammar which follows the notation of [§4.3.1](#jvms-4.3.1). In addition to that notation:

- The syntax *[x]* on the right-hand side of a production denotes zero or one occurrences of *x*. That is, *x* is an *optional symbol*. The alternative which contains the optional symbol actually defines two alternatives: one that omits the optional symbol and one that includes it.
- A very long right-hand side may be continued on a second line by clearly indenting the second line.

The grammar includes the terminal symbol *Identifier* to denote the name of a type, field, method, formal parameter, local variable, or type variable, as generated by a Java compiler. Such a name must not contain any of the ASCII characters `.` `;` `[` `/` `<` `>` `:` (that is, the characters forbidden in method names ([§4.2.2](#jvms-4.2.2)) and also colon) but may contain characters that must not appear in an identifier in the Java programming language (JLS §3.8).

Signatures rely on a hierarchy of nonterminals known as *type signatures*:

- A *Java type signature* represents either a reference type or a primitive type of the Java programming language.

  ​

  ​

  JavaTypeSignature:

  [ReferenceTypeSignature](#jvms-ReferenceTypeSignature) 
  [BaseType](#jvms-BaseType)

  The following production from [§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2) is repeated here for convenience:

  ​

  BaseType:

  (one of) 
  `B` `C` `D` `F` `I` `J` `S` `Z`

- A *reference type signature* represents a reference type of the Java programming language, that is, a class or interface type, a type variable, or an array type.

  A *class type signature* represents a (possibly parameterized) class or interface type. A class type signature must be formulated such that it can be reliably mapped to the binary name of the class it denotes by erasing any type arguments and converting each `.` character to a `$` character.

  A *type variable signature* represents a type variable.

  An *array type signature* represents one dimension of an array type.

  ​

  ​

  ReferenceTypeSignature:

  [ClassTypeSignature](#jvms-ClassTypeSignature) 
  [TypeVariableSignature](#jvms-TypeVariableSignature) 
  [ArrayTypeSignature](#jvms-ArrayTypeSignature)

  ​

  ClassTypeSignature:

  `L` [[PackageSpecifier](#jvms-PackageSpecifier)] [SimpleClassTypeSignature](#jvms-SimpleClassTypeSignature) {[ClassTypeSignatureSuffix](#jvms-ClassTypeSignatureSuffix)} `;`

  ​

  PackageSpecifier:

  Identifier `/` {[PackageSpecifier](#jvms-PackageSpecifier)}

  ​

  SimpleClassTypeSignature:

  Identifier [[TypeArguments](#jvms-TypeArguments)]

  ​

  TypeArguments:

  `<` [TypeArgument](#jvms-TypeArgument) {[TypeArgument](#jvms-TypeArgument)} `>`

  ​

  TypeArgument:

  [[WildcardIndicator](#jvms-WildcardIndicator)] [ReferenceTypeSignature](#jvms-ReferenceTypeSignature) 
  `*`

  ​

  WildcardIndicator:

  `+` 
  `-`

  ​

  ClassTypeSignatureSuffix:

  `.` [SimpleClassTypeSignature](#jvms-SimpleClassTypeSignature)

  ​

  TypeVariableSignature:

  `T` Identifier `;`

  ​

  ArrayTypeSignature:

  `[` [JavaTypeSignature](#jvms-JavaTypeSignature)

A *class signature* encodes type information about a (possibly generic) class declaration. It describes any type parameters of the class, and lists its (possibly parameterized) direct superclass and direct superinterfaces, if any. A type parameter is described by its name, followed by any class bound and interface bounds.

ClassSignature:

[[TypeParameters](#jvms-TypeParameters)] [SuperclassSignature](#jvms-SuperclassSignature) {[SuperinterfaceSignature](#jvms-SuperinterfaceSignature)}

TypeParameters:

`<` [TypeParameter](#jvms-TypeParameter) {[TypeParameter](#jvms-TypeParameter)} `>`

TypeParameter:

Identifier [ClassBound](#jvms-ClassBound) {[InterfaceBound](#jvms-InterfaceBound)}

ClassBound:

`:` [[ReferenceTypeSignature](#jvms-ReferenceTypeSignature)]

InterfaceBound:

`:` [ReferenceTypeSignature](#jvms-ReferenceTypeSignature)

SuperclassSignature:

[ClassTypeSignature](#jvms-ClassTypeSignature)

SuperinterfaceSignature:

[ClassTypeSignature](#jvms-ClassTypeSignature)

A *method signature* encodes type information about a (possibly generic) method declaration. It describes any type parameters of the method; the (possibly parameterized) types of any formal parameters; the (possibly parameterized) return type, if any; and the types of any exceptions declared in the method's `throws` clause.

MethodSignature:

[[TypeParameters](#jvms-TypeParameters)] `(` {[JavaTypeSignature](#jvms-JavaTypeSignature)} `)` [Result](#jvms-Result) {[ThrowsSignature](#jvms-ThrowsSignature)}

Result:

[JavaTypeSignature](#jvms-JavaTypeSignature) 
[VoidDescriptor](#jvms-VoidDescriptor)

ThrowsSignature:

`^` [ClassTypeSignature](#jvms-ClassTypeSignature) 
`^` [TypeVariableSignature](#jvms-TypeVariableSignature)

The following production from [§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3) is repeated here for convenience:

VoidDescriptor:

`V`

Due to compiler-generated artifacts, the method signature of a method may not correspond exactly to the method descriptor of the method ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)). In particular, the number of formal parameter types in the method signature may be less than the number of parameter descriptors in the method descriptor.

A *field signature* encodes the (possibly parameterized) type of a field, formal parameter, or local variable declaration.

FieldSignature:

[ReferenceTypeSignature](#jvms-ReferenceTypeSignature)
