
### 4.7.1. Defining and Naming New Attributes

Compilers are permitted to define and emit `class` files containing new attributes in the `attributes` tables of `class` file structures, `field_info` structures, `method_info` structures, and `Code` attributes ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). Java Virtual Machine implementations are permitted to recognize and use new attributes found in these `attributes` tables. However, any attribute not defined as part of the `class` file specification must not affect the semantics of the `class` file. Java Virtual Machine implementations are required to silently ignore attributes they do not recognize.

For instance, defining a new attribute to support vendor-specific debugging is permitted. Because Java Virtual Machine implementations are required to ignore attributes they do not recognize, `class` files intended for that particular Java Virtual Machine implementation will be usable by other implementations even if those implementations cannot make use of the additional debugging information that the `class` files contain.

Java Virtual Machine implementations are specifically prohibited from throwing an exception or otherwise refusing to use `class` files simply because of the presence of some new attribute. Of course, tools operating on `class` files may not run correctly if given `class` files that do not contain all the attributes they require.

Two attributes that are intended to be distinct, but that happen to use the same attribute name and are of the same length, will conflict on implementations that recognize either attribute. Attributes defined other than in this specification must have names chosen according to the package naming convention described in *The Java Language Specification, Java SE 8 Edition* (JLS §6.1).

Future versions of this specification may define additional attributes.

### 4.7.2. The `ConstantValue` Attribute

The `ConstantValue` attribute is a fixed-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `field_info` structure ([§4.5](#jvms-4.5)). A `ConstantValue` attribute represents the value of a constant expression (JLS §15.28), and is used as follows:

- If the `ACC_STATIC` flag in the `access_flags` item of the `field_info` structure is set, then the field represented by the `field_info` structure is assigned the value represented by its`ConstantValue` attribute as part of the initialization of the class or interface declaring the field ([§5.5](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-5.html#jvms-5.5)). This occurs prior to the invocation of the class or interface initialization method of that class or interface ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)).
- Otherwise, the Java Virtual Machine must silently ignore the attribute.

There may be at most one `ConstantValue` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `field_info` structure.

The `ConstantValue` attribute has the following format:

```
ConstantValue_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 constantvalue_index;
}

```

The items of the `ConstantValue_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`ConstantValue`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item of a `ConstantValue_attribute` structure must be two.

- constantvalue_index

  The value of the `constantvalue_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index gives the constant value represented by this attribute. The `constant_pool` entry must be of a type appropriate to the field, as specified in [Table 4.7.2-A](#jvms-4.7.2-300-C.1).**Table 4.7.2-A. Constant value attribute types**Field TypeEntry Type`long``CONSTANT_Long``float``CONSTANT_Float``double``CONSTANT_Double``int`, `short`, `char`, `byte`, `boolean``CONSTANT_Integer``String``CONSTANT_String`

### 4.7.3. The `Code` Attribute

The `Code` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure ([§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). A `Code` attribute contains the Java Virtual Machine instructions and auxiliary information for a method, including an instance initialization method or a class or interface initialization method ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)).

If the method is either `native` or `abstract`, its `method_info` structure must not have a `Code` attribute in its `attributes` table. Otherwise, its `method_info` structure must have exactly one `Code` attribute in its `attributes` table.

The `Code` attribute has the following format:

```
Code_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 max_stack;
    u2 max_locals;
    u4 code_length;
    u1 code[code_length];
    u2 exception_table_length;
    {   u2 start_pc;
        u2 end_pc;
        u2 handler_pc;
        u2 catch_type;
    } exception_table[exception_table_length];
    u2 attributes_count;
    attribute_info attributes[attributes_count];
}

```

The items of the `Code_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`Code`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- max_stack

  The value of the `max_stack` item gives the maximum depth of the operand stack of this method ([§2.6.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.6.2)) at any point during execution of the method.

- max_locals

  The value of the `max_locals` item gives the number of local variables in the local variable array allocated upon invocation of this method ([§2.6.1](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.6.1)), including the local variables used to pass parameters to the method on its invocation.The greatest local variable index for a value of type `long` or `double` is `max_locals - 2`. The greatest local variable index for a value of any other type is `max_locals - 1`.

- code_length

  The value of the `code_length` item gives the number of bytes in the `code` array for this method.The value of `code_length` must be greater than zero (as the `code` array must not be empty) and less than 65536.

- code[]

  The `code` array gives the actual bytes of Java Virtual Machine code that implement the method.When the `code` array is read into memory on a byte-addressable machine, if the first byte of the array is aligned on a 4-byte boundary, the *tableswitch* and *lookupswitch* 32-bit offsets will be 4-byte aligned. (Refer to the descriptions of those instructions for more information on the consequences of `code` array alignment.)The detailed constraints on the contents of the `code` array are extensive and are given in a separate section ([§4.9](#jvms-4.9)).

- exception_table_length

  The value of the `exception_table_length` item gives the number of entries in the `exception_table` table.

- exception_table[]

  Each entry in the `exception_table` array describes one exception handler in the `code` array. The order of the handlers in the `exception_table` array is significant ([§2.10](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.10)).Each `exception_table` entry contains the following four items:start_pc, end_pcThe values of the two items `start_pc` and `end_pc` indicate the ranges in the `code` array at which the exception handler is active. The value of `start_pc` must be a valid index into the `code` array of the opcode of an instruction. The value of `end_pc` either must be a valid index into the `code` array of the opcode of an instruction or must be equal to `code_length`, the length of the `code` array. The value of `start_pc` must be less than the value of `end_pc`.The `start_pc` is inclusive and `end_pc` is exclusive; that is, the exception handler must be active while the program counter is within the interval [`start_pc`, `end_pc`).The fact that `end_pc` is exclusive is a historical mistake in the design of the Java Virtual Machine: if the Java Virtual Machine code for a method is exactly 65535 bytes long and ends with an instruction that is 1 byte long, then that instruction cannot be protected by an exception handler. A compiler writer can work around this bug by limiting the maximum size of the generated Java Virtual Machine code for any method, instance initialization method, or static initializer (the size of any code array) to 65534 bytes.handler_pcThe value of the `handler_pc` item indicates the start of the exception handler. The value of the item must be a valid index into the `code` array and must be the index of the opcode of an instruction.catch_typeIf the value of the `catch_type` item is nonzero, it must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Class_info` structure ([§4.4.1](#jvms-4.4.1)) representing a class of exceptions that this exception handler is designated to catch. The exception handler will be called only if the thrown exception is an instance of the given class or one of its subclasses.The verifier checks that the class is `Throwable` or a subclass of `Throwable` ([§4.9.2](#jvms-4.9.2)).If the value of the `catch_type` item is zero, this exception handler is called for all exceptions.This is used to implement `finally` ([§3.13](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-3.html#jvms-3.13)).

- attributes_count

  The value of the `attributes_count` item indicates the number of attributes of the `Code` attribute.

- attributes[]

  Each value of the `attributes` table must be an `attribute_info` structure ([§4.7](#jvms-4.7)).A `Code` attribute can have any number of optional attributes associated with it.The attributes defined by this specification as appearing in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute are listed in [Table 4.7-C](#jvms-4.7-320).The rules concerning attributes defined to appear in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute are given in [§4.7](#jvms-4.7).The rules concerning non-predefined attributes in the `attributes` table of a `Code` attribute are given in [§4.7.1](#jvms-4.7.1).

