
#### 4.7.20.2. The `type_path` structure

Wherever a type is used in a declaration or expression, the `type_path` structure identifies which part of the type is annotated. An annotation may appear on the type itself, but if the type is a reference type, then there are additional locations where an annotation may appear:

- If an array type T`[]` is used in a declaration or expression, then an annotation may appear on any component type of the array type, including the element type.
- If a nested type T1`.`T2 is used in a declaration or expression, then an annotation may appear on the name of the top level type or any member type.
- If a parameterized type T`<`A`>` or T`<`? extends A`>` or T`<`? super A`>` is used in a declaration or expression, then an annotation may appear on any type argument or on the bound of any wildcard type argument.

For example, consider the different parts of `String``[]``[]` that are annotated in:

```
@Foo String[][]   // Annotates the class type String
String @Foo [][]  // Annotates the array type String[][]
String[] @Foo []  // Annotates the array type String[]

```

or the different parts of the nested type `Outer.Middle.Inner` that are annotated in:

```
@Foo Outer.Middle.Inner
Outer.@Foo Middle.Inner
Outer.Middle.@Foo Inner

```

or the different parts of the parameterized types `Map<String,Object>` and `List<...>` that are annotated in:

```
@Foo Map<String,Object>
Map<@Foo String,Object>
Map<String,@Foo Object>

List<@Foo ? extends String>
List<? extends @Foo String>

```

The `type_path` structure has the following format:

```
type_path {
    u1 path_length;
    {   u1 type_path_kind;
        u1 type_argument_index;
    } path[path_length];
}

```

The value of the `path_length` item gives the number of entries in the `path` array:

- If the value of `path_length` is `0`, then the annotation appears directly on the type itself.

- If the value of `path_length` is non-zero, then each entry in the `path` array represents an iterative, left-to-right step towards the precise location of the annotation in an array type, nested type, or parameterized type. (In an array type, the iteration visits the array type itself, then its component type, then the component type of that component type, and so on, until the element type is reached.) Each entry contains the following two items:

  - type_path_kind

    The legal values for the `type_path_kind` item are listed in [Table 4.7.20.2-A](#jvms-4.7.20.2-220-B-A.1).**Table 4.7.20.2-A. Interpretation of type_path_kind values**ValueInterpretation`0`Annotation is deeper in an array type`1`Annotation is deeper in a nested type`2`Annotation is on the bound of a wildcard type argument of a parameterized type`3`Annotation is on a type argument of a parameterized type

  - type_argument_index

    If the value of the `type_path_kind` item is `0`, `1`, or `2`, then the value of the `type_argument_index` item is `0`.If the value of the `type_path_kind` item is `3`, then the value of the `type_argument_index` item specifies which type argument of a parameterized type is annotated, where `0`indicates the first type argument of a parameterized type.

**Table 4.7.20.2-B. type_path structures for @A Map<@B ? extends @C String, @D List<@E Object>>**

| Annotation | `path_length` | `path`                                   |
| ---------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `@A`       | `0`           | `[]`                                     |
| `@B`       | `1`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@C`       | `2`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 2; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@D`       | `1`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 1}]` |
| `@E`       | `2`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 1}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}]` |

**Table 4.7.20.2-C. type_path structures for @I String @F [] @G [] @H []**

| Annotation | `path_length` | `path`                                   |
| ---------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `@F`       | `0`           | `[]`                                     |
| `@G`       | `1`           | `[{type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@H`       | `2`           | `[{type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@I`       | `3`           | `[{type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}]` |

**Table 4.7.20.2-D. type_path structures for @A List<@B Comparable<@F Object @C [] @D [] @E []>>**

| Annotation | `path_length` | `path`                                   |
| ---------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `@A`       | `0`           | `[]`                                     |
| `@B`       | `1`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@C`       | `2`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@D`       | `3`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@E`       | `4`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@F`       | `5`           | `[{type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}]` |

**Table 4.7.20.2-E. type_path structures for @C Outer . @B Middle . @A Inner**

| Annotation | `path_length` | `path`                                   |
| ---------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `@A`       | `2`           | `[{type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@B`       | `1`           | `[{type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@C`       | `0`           | `[]`                                     |

**Table 4.7.20.2-F. type_path structures for Outer . Middle<@D Foo . @C Bar> . Inner<@B String @A []>**

| Annotation | `path_length` | `path`                                   |
| ---------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| `@A`       | `3`           | `[{type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@B`       | `4`           | `[{type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 0; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@C`       | `3`           | `[{type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}]` |
| `@D`       | `2`           | `[{type_path_kind: 1; type_argument_index: 0}, {type_path_kind: 3; type_argument_index: 0}]` |

### 4.7.21. The `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations` Attribute

The `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute is an variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure, or `Code` attribute ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1), [§4.5](#jvms-4.5), [§4.6](#jvms-4.6), [§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). The `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute records run-time invisible annotations on types used in the corresponding declaration of a class, field, or method, or in an expression in the corresponding method body. The `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute also records annotations on type parameter declarations of generic classes, interfaces, methods, and constructors.

There may be at most one `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure, or `Code` attribute.

An `attributes` table contains a `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute only if types are annotated in kinds of declaration or expression that correspond to the parent structure or attribute of the `attributes` table.

The `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute has the following format:

```
RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations_attribute {
    u2              attribute_name_index;
    u4              attribute_length;
    u2              num_annotations;
    type_annotation annotations[num_annotations];
}

```

The items of the `RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure representing the string "`RuntimeInvisibleTypeAnnotations`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- num_annotations

  The value of the `num_annotations` item gives the number of run-time invisible type annotations represented by the structure.

- annotations[]

  Each entry in the `annotations` table represents a single run-time invisible annotation on a type used in a declaration or expression. The `type_annotation` structure is specified in[§4.7.20](#jvms-4.7.20).

### 4.7.22. The `AnnotationDefault` Attribute

The `AnnotationDefault` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of certain `method_info` structures ([§4.6](#jvms-4.6)), namely those representing elements of annotation types (JLS §9.6.1). The `AnnotationDefault` attribute records the default value (JLS §9.6.2) for the element represented by the `method_info` structure. The Java Virtual Machine must make this default value available so it can be applied by appropriate reflective APIs.

There may be at most one `AnnotationDefault` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure which represents an element of an annotation type.

The `AnnotationDefault` attribute has the following format:

```
AnnotationDefault_attribute {
    u2            attribute_name_index;
    u4            attribute_length;
    element_value default_value;
}

```

The items of the `AnnotationDefault_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`AnnotationDefault`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- default_value

  The `default_value` item represents the default value of the annotation type element represented by the `method_info` structure enclosing this `AnnotationDefault` attribute.

### 4.7.23. The `BootstrapMethods` Attribute

The `BootstrapMethods` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1)). The `BootstrapMethods` attribute records bootstrap method specifiers referenced by *invokedynamic* instructions ([§*invokedynamic*](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5.invokedynamic)).

There must be exactly one `BootstrapMethods` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure if the `constant_pool` table of the `ClassFile` structure has at least one `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic_info` entry ([§4.4.10](#jvms-4.4.10)).

There may be at most one `BootstrapMethods` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile` structure.

The `BootstrapMethods` attribute has the following format:

```
BootstrapMethods_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u2 num_bootstrap_methods;
    {   u2 bootstrap_method_ref;
        u2 num_bootstrap_arguments;
        u2 bootstrap_arguments[num_bootstrap_arguments];
    } bootstrap_methods[num_bootstrap_methods];
}

```

The items of the `BootstrapMethods_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`BootstrapMethods`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.The value of the `attribute_length` item is thus dependent on the number of *invokedynamic* instructions in this `ClassFile` structure.

- num_bootstrap_methods

  The value of the `num_bootstrap_methods` item determines the number of bootstrap method specifiers in the `bootstrap_methods` array.

- bootstrap_methods[]

  Each entry in the `bootstrap_methods` table contains an index to a `CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info` structure ([§4.4.8](#jvms-4.4.8)) which specifies a bootstrap method, and a sequence (perhaps empty) of indexes to *static arguments* for the bootstrap method.Each `bootstrap_methods` entry must contain the following three items:bootstrap_method_refThe value of the `bootstrap_method_ref` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a`CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info` structure ([§4.4.8](#jvms-4.4.8)).The form of the method handle is driven by the continuing resolution of the call site specifier in [§*invokedynamic*](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5.invokedynamic), where execution of `invoke` in `java.lang.invoke.MethodHandle` requires that the bootstrap method handle be adjustable to the actual arguments being passed, as if by a call to`java.lang.invoke.MethodHandle.asType`. Accordingly, the `reference_kind` item of the `CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info` structure should have the value 6 or 8 ([§5.4.3.5](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-5.html#jvms-5.4.3.5)), and the `reference_index` item should specify a static method or constructor that takes three arguments of type `java.lang.invoke.MethodHandles.Lookup`, `String`, and`java.lang.invoke.MethodType`, in that order. Otherwise, invocation of the bootstrap method handle during call site specifier resolution will complete abruptly.num_bootstrap_argumentsThe value of the `num_bootstrap_arguments` item gives the number of items in the `bootstrap_arguments` array.bootstrap_arguments[]Each entry in the `bootstrap_arguments` array must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a`CONSTANT_String_info`, `CONSTANT_Class_info`, `CONSTANT_Integer_info`, `CONSTANT_Long_info`, `CONSTANT_Float_info`, `CONSTANT_Double_info`,`CONSTANT_MethodHandle_info`, or `CONSTANT_MethodType_info` structure ([§4.4.3](#jvms-4.4.3), [§4.4.1](#jvms-4.4.1), [§4.4.4](#jvms-4.4.4), [§4.4.5](#jvms-4.4.5), [§4.4.8](#jvms-4.4.8), [§4.4.9](#jvms-4.4.9)).

### 4.7.24. The `MethodParameters` Attribute

The `MethodParameters` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure ([§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). A `MethodParameters` attribute records information about the formal parameters of a method, such as their names.

There may be at most one `MethodParameters` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure.

The `MethodParameters` attribute has the following format:

```
MethodParameters_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u1 parameters_count;
    {   u2 name_index;
        u2 access_flags;
    } parameters[parameters_count];
}

```

The items of the `MethodParameters_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure representing the string "`MethodParameters`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- parameters_count

  The value of the `parameters_count` item indicates the number of parameter descriptors in the method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)) referenced by the `descriptor_index` of the attribute's enclosing `method_info` structure.This is not a constraint which a Java Virtual Machine implementation must enforce during format checking ([§4.8](#jvms-4.8)). The task of matching parameter descriptors in a method descriptor against the items in the `parameters` array below is done by the reflection libraries of the Java SE platform.

- parameters[]

  Each entry in the `parameters` array contains the following pair of items:name_indexThe value of the `name_index` item must either be zero or a valid index into the `constant_pool` table.If the value of the `name_index` item is zero, then this `parameters` element indicates a formal parameter with no name.If the value of the `name_index` item is nonzero, the `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure representing a valid unqualified name denoting a formal parameter ([§4.2.2](#jvms-4.2.2)).access_flagsThe value of the `access_flags` item is as follows:0x0010 (`ACC_FINAL`)Indicates that the formal parameter was declared `final`.0x1000 (`ACC_SYNTHETIC`)Indicates that the formal parameter was not explicitly or implicitly declared in source code, according to the specification of the language in which the source code was written (JLS §13.1). (The formal parameter is an implementation artifact of the compiler which produced this `class` file.)0x8000 (`ACC_MANDATED`)Indicates that the formal parameter was implicitly declared in source code, according to the specification of the language in which the source code was written (JLS §13.1). (The formal parameter is mandated by a language specification, so all compilers for the language must emit it.)

The *i*'th entry in the `parameters` array corresponds to the *i*'th parameter descriptor in the enclosing method's descriptor. (The `parameters_count` item is one byte because a method descriptor is limited to 255 parameters.) Effectively, this means the `parameters` array stores information for all the parameters of the method. One could imagine other schemes, where entries in the `parameters` array specify their corresponding parameter descriptors, but it would unduly complicate the `MethodParameters` attribute.

The *i*'th entry in the `parameters` array may or may not correspond to the *i*'th type in the enclosing method's `Signature` attribute (if present), or to the *i*'th annotation in the enclosing method's parameter annotations.

