
### 4.7.17. The `RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations` Attribute

The `RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1), [§4.5](#jvms-4.5), [§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). The`RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations` attribute records run-time invisible annotations on the declaration of the corresponding class, method, or field.

There may be at most one `RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure.

The `RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations` attribute is similar to the `RuntimeVisibleAnnotations` attribute ([§4.7.16](#jvms-4.7.16)), except that the annotations represented by a `RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations`attribute must not be made available for return by reflective APIs, unless the Java Virtual Machine has been instructed to retain these annotations via some implementation-specific mechanism such as a command line flag. In the absence of such instructions, the Java Virtual Machine ignores this attribute.

The `RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations` attribute has the following format:

```
RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations_attribute {
    u2         attribute_name_index;
    u4         attribute_length;
    u2         num_annotations;
    annotation annotations[num_annotations];
}

```

The items of the `RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`RuntimeInvisibleAnnotations`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- num_annotations

  The value of the `num_annotations` item gives the number of run-time invisible annotations represented by the structure.

- annotations[]

  Each entry in the `annotations` table represents a single run-time invisible annotation on a declaration. The `annotation` structure is specified in [§4.7.16](#jvms-4.7.16).

### 4.7.18. The `RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations` Attribute

The `RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of the `method_info` structure ([§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). The `RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations`attribute records run-time visible annotations on the declarations of formal parameters of the corresponding method. The Java Virtual Machine must make these annotations available so they can be returned by the appropriate reflective APIs.

There may be at most one `RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure.

The `RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute has the following format:

```
RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u1 num_parameters;
    {   u2         num_annotations;
        annotation annotations[num_annotations];
    } parameter_annotations[num_parameters];
}

```

The items of the `RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- num_parameters

  The value of the `num_parameters` item gives the number of formal parameters of the method represented by the `method_info` structure on which the annotation occurs.This duplicates information that could be extracted from the method descriptor.

- parameter_annotations[]

  Each entry in the `parameter_annotations` table represents all of the run-time visible annotations on the declaration of a single formal parameter. The *i*'th entry in the table corresponds to the *i*'th formal parameter in the method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)). Each `parameter_annotations` entry contains the following two items:num_annotationsThe value of the `num_annotations` item indicates the number of run-time visible annotations on the declaration of the formal parameter corresponding to the`parameter_annotations` entry.annotations[]Each entry in the `annotations` table represents a single run-time visible annotation on the declaration of the formal parameter corresponding to the `parameter_annotations` entry. The `annotation` structure is specified in [§4.7.16](#jvms-4.7.16).

### 4.7.19. The `RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations` Attribute

The `RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute is a variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure ([§4.6](#jvms-4.6)). The`RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute records run-time invisible annotations on the declarations of formal parameters of the corresponding method.

There may be at most one `RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `method_info` structure.

The `RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute is similar to the `RuntimeVisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute ([§4.7.18](#jvms-4.7.18)), except that the annotations represented by a `RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute must not be made available for return by reflective APIs, unless the Java Virtual Machine has specifically been instructed to retain these annotations via some implementation-specific mechanism such as a command line flag. In the absence of such instructions, the Java Virtual Machine ignores this attribute.

The `RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations` attribute has the following format:

```
RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations_attribute {
    u2 attribute_name_index;
    u4 attribute_length;
    u1 num_parameters;
    {   u2         num_annotations;
        annotation annotations[num_annotations];
    } parameter_annotations[num_parameters];
}

```

The items of the `RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure ([§4.4.7](#jvms-4.4.7)) representing the string "`RuntimeInvisibleParameterAnnotations`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- num_parameters

  The value of the `num_parameters` item gives the number of formal parameters of the method represented by the `method_info` structure on which the annotation occurs.This duplicates information that could be extracted from the method descriptor.

- parameter_annotations[]

  Each entry in the `parameter_annotations` table represents all of the run-time invisible annotations on the declaration of a single formal parameter. The *i*'th entry in the table corresponds to the *i*'th formal parameter in the method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)). Each `parameter_annotations` entry contains the following two items:num_annotationsThe value of the `num_annotations` item indicates the number of run-time invisible annotations on the declaration of the formal parameter corresponding to the`parameter_annotations` entry.annotations[]Each entry in the `annotations` table represents a single run-time invisible annotation on the declaration of the formal parameter corresponding to the`parameter_annotations` entry. The `annotation` structure is specified in [§4.7.16](#jvms-4.7.16).

### 4.7.20. The `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` Attribute

The `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute is an variable-length attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure, or `Code` attribute ([§4.1](#jvms-4.1), [§4.5](#jvms-4.5),[§4.6](#jvms-4.6), [§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). The `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute records run-time visible annotations on types used in the declaration of the corresponding class, field, or method, or in an expression in the corresponding method body. The `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute also records run-time visible annotations on type parameter declarations of generic classes, interfaces, methods, and constructors. The Java Virtual Machine must make these annotations available so they can be returned by the appropriate reflective APIs.

There may be at most one `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute in the `attributes` table of a `ClassFile`, `field_info`, or `method_info` structure, or `Code` attribute.

An `attributes` table contains a `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute only if types are annotated in kinds of declaration or expression that correspond to the parent structure or attribute of the `attributes` table.

For example, all annotations on types in the `implements` clause of a class declaration are recorded in the `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute of the class's `ClassFile` structure. Meanwhile, all annotations on the type in a field declaration are recorded in the `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute of the field's `field_info` structure.

The `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute has the following format:

```
RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations_attribute {
    u2              attribute_name_index;
    u4              attribute_length;
    u2              num_annotations;
    type_annotation annotations[num_annotations];
}

```

The items of the `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations_attribute` structure are as follows:

- attribute_name_index

  The value of the `attribute_name_index` item must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The `constant_pool` entry at that index must be a `CONSTANT_Utf8_info` structure representing the string "`RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations`".

- attribute_length

  The value of the `attribute_length` item indicates the length of the attribute, excluding the initial six bytes.

- num_annotations

  The value of the `num_annotations` item gives the number of run-time visible type annotations represented by the structure.

- annotations[]

  Each entry in the `annotations` table represents a single run-time visible annotation on a type used in a declaration or expression. The `type_annotation` structure has the following format:`type_annotation {    u1 target_type;    union {        type_parameter_target;        supertype_target;        type_parameter_bound_target;        empty_target;        method_formal_parameter_target;        throws_target;        localvar_target;        catch_target;        offset_target;        type_argument_target;    } target_info;    type_path target_path;    u2        type_index;    u2        num_element_value_pairs;    {   u2            element_name_index;        element_value value;    } element_value_pairs[num_element_value_pairs];}      `The first three items - `target_type`, `target_info`, and `target_path` - specify the precise location of the annotated type. The last three items - `type_index`,`num_element_value_pairs`, and `element_value_pairs[]` - specify the annotation's own type and element-value pairs.The items of the `type_annotation` structure are as follows:target_typeThe value of the `target_type` item denotes the kind of target on which the annotation appears. The various kinds of target correspond to the *type contexts* of the Java programming language where types are used in declarations and expressions (JLS §4.11).The legal values of `target_type` are specified in [Table 4.7.20-A](#jvms-4.7.20-400) and [Table 4.7.20-B](#jvms-4.7.20-410). Each value is a one-byte tag indicating which item of the `target_info` union follows the `target_type` item to give more information about the target.The kinds of target in [Table 4.7.20-A](#jvms-4.7.20-400) and [Table 4.7.20-B](#jvms-4.7.20-410) correspond to the type contexts in JLS §4.11. Namely, `target_type` values 0x10-0x17 and 0x40-0x42 correspond to type contexts 1-10, while `target_type` values 0x43-0x4B correspond to type contexts 11-16.The value of the `target_type` item determines whether the `type_annotation` structure appears in a `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute in a `ClassFile` structure, a `field_info` structure, a `method_info` structure, or a `Code` attribute. [Table 4.7.20-C](#jvms-4.7.20-420) gives the location of the `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute for a `type_annotation` structure with each legal `target_type` value.target_infoThe value of the `target_info` item denotes precisely which type in a declaration or expression is annotated.The items of the `target_info` union are specified in [§4.7.20.1](#jvms-4.7.20.1).target_pathThe value of the `target_path` item denotes precisely which part of the type indicated by `target_info` is annotated.The format of the `type_path` structure is specified in [§4.7.20.2](#jvms-4.7.20.2).type_index, num_element_value_pairs, element_value_pairs[]The meaning of these items in the `type_annotation` structure is the same as their meaning in the `annotation` structure ([§4.7.16](#jvms-4.7.16)).

**Table 4.7.20-A. Interpretation of target_type values (Part 1)**

| Value | Kind of target                           | `target_info` item            |
| ----- | ---------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| 0x00  | type parameter declaration of generic class or interface | `type_parameter_target`       |
| 0x01  | type parameter declaration of generic method or constructor | `type_parameter_target`       |
| 0x10  | type in `extends` or `implements` clause of class declaration (including the direct superclass or direct superinterface of an anonymous class declaration), or in `extends` clause of interface declaration | `supertype_target`            |
| 0x11  | type in bound of type parameter declaration of generic class or interface | `type_parameter_bound_target` |
| 0x12  | type in bound of type parameter declaration of generic method or constructor | `type_parameter_bound_target` |
| 0x13  | type in field declaration                | `empty_target`                |
| 0x14  | return type of method, or type of newly constructed object | `empty_target`                |
| 0x15  | receiver type of method or constructor   | `empty_target`                |
| 0x16  | type in formal parameter declaration of method, constructor, or lambda expression | `formal_parameter_target`     |
| 0x17  | type in `throws` clause of method or constructor | `throws_target`               |

**Table 4.7.20-B. Interpretation of target_type values (Part 2)**

| Value | Kind of target                           | `target_info` item     |
| ----- | ---------------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| 0x40  | type in local variable declaration       | `localvar_target`      |
| 0x41  | type in resource variable declaration    | `localvar_target`      |
| 0x42  | type in exception parameter declaration  | `catch_target`         |
| 0x43  | type in *instanceof* expression          | `offset_target`        |
| 0x44  | type in *new* expression                 | `offset_target`        |
| 0x45  | type in method reference expression using `::`*new* | `offset_target`        |
| 0x46  | type in method reference expression using `::`*Identifier* | `offset_target`        |
| 0x47  | type in cast expression                  | `type_argument_target` |
| 0x48  | type argument for generic constructor in *new* expression or explicit constructor invocation statement | `type_argument_target` |
| 0x49  | type argument for generic method in method invocation expression | `type_argument_target` |
| 0x4A  | type argument for generic constructor in method reference expression using `::`*new* | `type_argument_target` |
| 0x4B  | type argument for generic method in method reference expression using `::`*Identifier* | `type_argument_target` |

**Table 4.7.20-C. Location of enclosing attribute for target_type values**

| Value     | Kind of target                           | Location      |
| --------- | ---------------------------------------- | ------------- |
| 0x00      | type parameter declaration of generic class or interface | `ClassFile`   |
| 0x01      | type parameter declaration of generic method or constructor | `method_info` |
| 0x10      | type in `extends` clause of class or interface declaration, or in `implements` clause of interface declaration | `ClassFile`   |
| 0x11      | type in bound of type parameter declaration of generic class or interface | `ClassFile`   |
| 0x12      | type in bound of type parameter declaration of generic method or constructor | `method_info` |
| 0x13      | type in field declaration                | `field_info`  |
| 0x14      | return type of method or constructor     | `method_info` |
| 0x15      | receiver type of method or constructor   | `method_info` |
| 0x16      | type in formal parameter declaration of method, constructor, or lambda expression | `method_info` |
| 0x17      | type in `throws` clause of method or constructor | `method_info` |
| 0x40-0x4B | types in local variable declarations, resource variable declarations, exception parameter declarations, expressions | `Code`        |

#### 4.7.20.1. The `target_info` union

The items of the `target_info` union (except for the first) specify precisely which type in a declaration or expression is annotated. The first item specifies not which type, but rather which declaration of a type parameter is annotated. The items are as follows:

- The `type_parameter_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on the declaration of the *i*'th type parameter of a generic class, generic interface, generic method, or generic constructor.

  ​

  ```
  type_parameter_target {
      u1 type_parameter_index;
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the `type_parameter_index` item specifies which type parameter declaration is annotated. A `type_parameter_index` value of `0` specifies the first type parameter declaration.

- The `supertype_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on a type in the `extends` or `implements` clause of a class or interface declaration.

  ​

  ```
  supertype_target {
      u2 supertype_index;
  }
      
  ```

  A `supertype_index` value of 65535 specifies that the annotation appears on the superclass in an `extends` clause of a class declaration.

  Any other `supertype_index` value is an index into the `interfaces` array of the enclosing `ClassFile` structure, and specifies that the annotation appears on that superinterface in either the `implements` clause of a class declaration or the `extends` clause of an interface declaration.

- The `type_parameter_bound_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on the *i*'th bound of the *j*'th type parameter declaration of a generic class, interface, method, or constructor.

  ​

  ```
  type_parameter_bound_target {
      u1 type_parameter_index;
      u1 bound_index;
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the of `type_parameter_index` item specifies which type parameter declaration has an annotated bound. A `type_parameter_index` value of `0` specifies the first type parameter declaration.

  The value of the `bound_index` item specifies which bound of the type parameter declaration indicated by `type_parameter_index` is annotated. A `bound_index` value of `0` specifies the first bound of a type parameter declaration.

  The `type_parameter_bound_target` item records that a bound is annotated, but does not record the type which constitutes the bound. The type may be found by inspecting the class signature or method signature stored in the appropriate `Signature` attribute.

- The `empty_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on either the type in a field declaration, the return type of a method, the type of a newly constructed object, or the receiver type of a method or constructor.

  ​

  ```
  empty_target {
  }
      
  ```

  Only one type appears in each of these locations, so there is no per-type information to represent in the `target_info` union.

- The `formal_parameter_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on the type in a formal parameter declaration of a method, constructor, or lambda expression.

  ​

  ```
  formal_parameter_target {
      u1 formal_parameter_index;
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the `formal_parameter_index` item specifies which formal parameter declaration has an annotated type. A `formal_parameter_index` value of `0` specifies the first formal parameter declaration.

  The `formal_parameter_target` item records that a formal parameter's type is annotated, but does not record the type itself. The type may be found by inspecting the method descriptor ([§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)) of the `method_info` structure enclosing the `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute. A `formal_parameter_index` value of `0` indicates the first parameter descriptor in the method descriptor.

- The `throws_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on the *i*'th type in the `throws` clause of a method or constructor declaration.

  ​

  ```
  throws_target {
      u2 throws_type_index;
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the `throws_type_index` item is an index into the `exception_index_table` array of the `Exceptions` attribute of the `method_info` structure enclosing the `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute.

- The `localvar_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on the type in a local variable declaration, including a variable declared as a resource in a `try`-with-resources statement.

  ​

  ```
  localvar_target {
      u2 table_length;
      {   u2 start_pc;
          u2 length;
          u2 index;
      } table[table_length];
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the `table_length` item gives the number of entries in the `table` array. Each entry indicates a range of `code` array offsets within which a local variable has a value. It also indicates the index into the local variable array of the current frame at which that local variable can be found. Each entry contains the following three items:

  - start_pc, length

    The given local variable has a value at indices into the `code` array in the interval [`start_pc`, `start_pc + length`), that is, between `start_pc` inclusive and `start_pc + length`exclusive.

  - index

    The given local variable must be at `index` in the local variable array of the current frame.If the local variable at `index` is of type `double` or `long`, it occupies both `index` and `index + 1`.

  A table is needed to fully specify the local variable whose type is annotated, because a single local variable may be represented with different local variable indices over multiple live ranges. The `start_pc`, `length`, and `index` items in each table entry specify the same information as a `LocalVariableTable` attribute.

  The `localvar_target` item records that a local variable's type is annotated, but does not record the type itself. The type may be found by inspecting the appropriate`LocalVariableTable` attribute.

- The `catch_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on the *i*'th type in an exception parameter declaration.

  ​

  ```
  catch_target {
      u2 exception_table_index;
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the `exception_table_index` item is an index into the `exception_table` array of the `Code` attribute enclosing the `RuntimeVisibleTypeAnnotations` attribute.

  The possibility of more than one type in an exception parameter declaration arises from the multi-`catch` clause of the `try` statement, where the type of the exception parameter is a union of types (JLS §14.20). A compiler usually creates one `exception_table` entry for each type in the union, which allows the `catch_target` item to distinguish them. This preserves the correspondence between a type and its annotations.

- The `offset_target` item indicates that an annotation appears on either the type in an *instanceof* expression or a *new* expression, or the type before the `::` in a method reference expression.

  ​

  ```
  offset_target {
      u2 offset;
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the `offset` item specifies the `code` array offset of either the *instanceof* bytecode instruction corresponding to the *instanceof* expression, the *new* bytecode instruction corresponding to the *new* expression, or the bytecode instruction corresponding to the method reference expression.

- The `type_argument_target` item indicates that an annotation appears either on the *i*'th type in a cast expression, or on the *i*'th type argument in the explicit type argument list for any of the following: a *new* expression, an explicit constructor invocation statement, a method invocation expression, or a method reference expression.

  ​

  ```
  type_argument_target {
      u2 offset;
      u1 type_argument_index;
  }
      
  ```

  The value of the `offset` item specifies the `code` array offset of either the bytecode instruction corresponding to the cast expression, the *new* bytecode instruction corresponding to the *new* expression, the bytecode instruction corresponding to the explicit constructor invocation statement, the bytecode instruction corresponding to the method invocation expression, or the bytecode instruction corresponding to the method reference expression.

  For a cast expression, the value of the `type_argument_index` item specifies which type in the cast operator is annotated. A `type_argument_index` value of `0` specifies the first (or only) type in the cast operator.

  The possibility of more than one type in a cast expression arises from a cast to an intersection type.

  For an explicit type argument list, the value of the `type_argument_index` item specifies which type argument is annotated. A `type_argument_index` value of `0` specifies the first type argument.

