## 4.9. Constraints on Java Virtual Machine Code

The code for a method, instance initialization method, or class or interface initialization method ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)) is stored in the `code` array of the `Code` attribute of a `method_info` structure of a `class` file ([§4.7.3](#jvms-4.7.3)). This section describes the constraints associated with the contents of the `Code_attribute` structure.

### 4.9.1. Static Constraints

The *static constraints* on a `class` file are those defining the well-formedness of the file. These constraints have been given in the previous sections, except for static constraints on the code in the `class` file. The static constraints on the code in a `class` file specify how Java Virtual Machine instructions must be laid out in the `code` array and what the operands of individual instructions must be.

The static constraints on the instructions in the `code` array are as follows:

- Only instances of the instructions documented in [§6.5](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.5) may appear in the `code` array. Instances of instructions using the reserved opcodes ([§6.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-6.html#jvms-6.2)) or any opcodes not documented in this specification must not appear in the `code` array.

  If the `class` file version number is 51.0 or above, then neither the *jsr* opcode or the *jsr_w* opcode may appear in the `code` array.

- The opcode of the first instruction in the `code` array begins at index `0`.

- For each instruction in the `code` array except the last, the index of the opcode of the next instruction equals the index of the opcode of the current instruction plus the length of that instruction, including all its operands.

  The *wide* instruction is treated like any other instruction for these purposes; the opcode specifying the operation that a *wide* instruction is to modify is treated as one of the operands of that *wide* instruction. That opcode must never be directly reachable by the computation.

- The last byte of the last instruction in the `code` array must be the byte at index `code_length - 1`.

The static constraints on the operands of instructions in the `code` array are as follows:

- The target of each jump and branch instruction (*jsr*, *jsr_w*, *goto*, *goto_w*, *ifeq*, *ifne*, *ifle*, *iflt*, *ifge*, *ifgt*, *ifnull*, *ifnonnull*, *if_icmpeq*, *if_icmpne*, *if_icmple*, *if_icmplt*, *if_icmpge*, *if_icmpgt*, *if_acmpeq*, *if_acmpne*) must be the opcode of an instruction within this method.

  The target of a jump or branch instruction must never be the opcode used to specify the operation to be modified by a *wide* instruction; a jump or branch target may be the *wide*instruction itself.

- Each target, including the default, of each *tableswitch* instruction must be the opcode of an instruction within this method.

  Each *tableswitch* instruction must have a number of entries in its jump table that is consistent with the value of its *low* and *high* jump table operands, and its *low* value must be less than or equal to its *high* value.

  No target of a *tableswitch* instruction may be the opcode used to specify the operation to be modified by a *wide* instruction; a *tableswitch* target may be a *wide* instruction itself.

- Each target, including the default, of each *lookupswitch* instruction must be the opcode of an instruction within this method.

  Each *lookupswitch* instruction must have a number of *match-offset* pairs that is consistent with the value of its *npairs* operand. The *match-offset* pairs must be sorted in increasing numerical order by signed match value.

  No target of a *lookupswitch* instruction may be the opcode used to specify the operation to be modified by a *wide* instruction; a *lookupswitch* target may be a *wide* instruction itself.

- The operand of each *ldc* instruction and each *ldc_w* instruction must be a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type:

  - `CONSTANT_Integer`, `CONSTANT_Float`, or `CONSTANT_String` if the `class` file version number is less than 49.0.
  - `CONSTANT_Integer`, `CONSTANT_Float`, `CONSTANT_String`, or `CONSTANT_Class` if the `class` file version number is 49.0 or 50.0.
  - `CONSTANT_Integer`, `CONSTANT_Float`, `CONSTANT_String`, `CONSTANT_Class`, `CONSTANT_MethodType`, or `CONSTANT_MethodHandle` if the `class` file version number is 51.0 or above.

- The operands of each *ldc2_w* instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Long`or `CONSTANT_Double`.

  The subsequent constant pool index must also be a valid index into the constant pool, and the constant pool entry at that index must not be used.

- The operands of each *getfield*, *putfield*, *getstatic*, and *putstatic* instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Fieldref`.

- The *indexbyte* operands of each *invokevirtual* instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Methodref`.

- The *indexbyte* operands of each *invokespecial* and *invokestatic* instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. If the `class` file version number is less than 52.0, the constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Methodref`; if the `class` file version number is 52.0 or above, the constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Methodref` or `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref`.

- The *indexbyte* operands of each *invokeinterface* instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref`.

  The value of the *count* operand of each *invokeinterface* instruction must reflect the number of local variables necessary to store the arguments to be passed to the interface method, as implied by the descriptor of the `CONSTANT_NameAndType_info` structure referenced by the `CONSTANT_InterfaceMethodref` constant pool entry.

  The fourth operand byte of each *invokeinterface* instruction must have the value zero.

- The *indexbyte* operands of each *invokedynamic* instruction must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_InvokeDynamic`.

  The third and fourth operand bytes of each *invokedynamic* instruction must have the value zero.

- Only the *invokespecial* instruction is allowed to invoke an instance initialization method ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)).

  No other method whose name begins with the character '`<`' ('`\u003c`') may be called by the method invocation instructions. In particular, the class or interface initialization method specially named `<clinit>` is never called explicitly from Java Virtual Machine instructions, but only implicitly by the Java Virtual Machine itself.

- The operands of each *instanceof*, *checkcast*, *new*, and *anewarray* instruction, and the *indexbyte* operands of each *multianewarray* instruction, must represent a valid index into the `constant_pool` table. The constant pool entry referenced by that index must be of type `CONSTANT_Class`.

- No *new* instruction may reference a constant pool entry of type `CONSTANT_Class` that represents an array type ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2)). The *new* instruction cannot be used to create an array.

- No *anewarray* instruction may be used to create an array of more than 255 dimensions.

- A *multianewarray* instruction must be used only to create an array of a type that has at least as many dimensions as the value of its *dimensions* operand. That is, while a *multianewarray* instruction is not required to create all of the dimensions of the array type referenced by its *indexbyte* operands, it must not attempt to create more dimensions than are in the array type.

  The *dimensions* operand of each *multianewarray* instruction must not be zero.

- The *atype* operand of each *newarray* instruction must take one of the values `T_BOOLEAN` (4), `T_CHAR` (5), `T_FLOAT` (6), `T_DOUBLE` (7), `T_BYTE` (8), `T_SHORT` (9), `T_INT` (10), or `T_LONG` (11).

- The *index* operand of each *iload*, *fload*, *aload*, *istore*, *fstore*, *astore*, *iinc*, and *ret* instruction must be a non-negative integer no greater than `max_locals - 1`.

  The implicit index of each *iload_<n>*, *fload_<n>*, *aload_<n>*, *istore_<n>*, *fstore_<n>*, and *astore_<n>* instruction must be no greater than `max_locals - 1`.

- The *index* operand of each *lload*, *dload*, *lstore*, and *dstore* instruction must be no greater than `max_locals - 2`.

  The implicit index of each *lload_<n>*, *dload_<n>*, *lstore_<n>*, and *dstore_<n>* instruction must be no greater than `max_locals - 2`.

- The *indexbyte* operands of each *wide* instruction modifying an *iload*, *fload*, *aload*, *istore*, *fstore*, *astore*, *iinc*, or *ret* instruction must represent a non-negative integer no greater than`max_locals - 1`.

  The *indexbyte* operands of each *wide* instruction modifying an *lload*, *dload*, *lstore*, or *dstore* instruction must represent a non-negative integer no greater than `max_locals - 2`.

### 4.9.2. Structural Constraints

The structural constraints on the `code` array specify constraints on relationships between Java Virtual Machine instructions. The structural constraints are as follows:

- Each instruction must only be executed with the appropriate type and number of arguments in the operand stack and local variable array, regardless of the execution path that leads to its invocation.

  An instruction operating on values of type `int` is also permitted to operate on values of type `boolean`, `byte`, `char`, and `short`.

  As noted in [§2.3.4](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.3.4) and [§2.11.1](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.11.1), the Java Virtual Machine internally converts values of types `boolean`, `byte`, `short`, and `char` to type `int`.)

- If an instruction can be executed along several different execution paths, the operand stack must have the same depth ([§2.6.2](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.6.2)) prior to the execution of the instruction, regardless of the path taken.

- At no point during execution can the operand stack grow to a depth greater than that implied by the `max_stack` item.

- At no point during execution can more values be popped from the operand stack than it contains.

- At no point during execution can the order of the local variable pair holding a value of type `long` or `double` be reversed or the pair split up. At no point can the local variables of such a pair be operated on individually.

- No local variable (or local variable pair, in the case of a value of type `long` or `double`) can be accessed before it is assigned a value.

- Each *invokespecial* instruction must name an instance initialization method ([§2.9](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jvms/se8/html/jvms-2.html#jvms-2.9)), a method in the current class or interface, a method in a superclass of the current class, a method in a direct superinterface of the current class or interface, or a method in `Object`.

  When an instance initialization method is invoked, an uninitialized class instance must be in an appropriate position on the operand stack. An instance initialization method must never be invoked on an initialized class instance.

  If an *invokespecial* instruction names an instance initialization method and the target reference on the operand stack is an uninitialized class instance for the current class, then *invokespecial* must name an instance initialization method from the current class or its direct superclass.

  If an *invokespecial* instruction names an instance initialization method and the target reference on the operand stack is a class instance created by an earlier *new* instruction, then *invokespecial* must name an instance initialization method from the class of that class instance.

  If an *invokespecial* instruction names a method which is not an instance initialization method, then the type of the target reference on the operand stack must be assignment compatible with the current class (JLS §5.2).

- Each instance initialization method, except for the instance initialization method derived from the constructor of class `Object`, must call either another instance initialization method of `this` or an instance initialization method of its direct superclass `super` before its instance members are *accessed*.

  However, instance fields of `this` that are declared in the current class may be *assigned* before calling any instance initialization method.

- When any instance method is invoked or when any instance variable is accessed, the class instance that contains the instance method or instance variable must already be initialized.

- If there is an uninitialized class instance in a local variable in code protected by an exception handler, then i) if the handler is inside an `<init>` method, the handler must throw an exception or loop forever, and ii) if the handler is not inside an `<init>` method, the uninitialized class instance must remain uninitialized.

- There must never be an uninitialized class instance on the operand stack or in a local variable when a *jsr* or *jsr_w* instruction is executed.

- The type of every class instance that is the target of a method invocation instruction must be assignment compatible with the class or interface type specified in the instruction (JLS §5.2).

- The types of the arguments to each method invocation must be method invocation compatible with the method descriptor (JLS §5.3, [§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)).

- Each return instruction must match its method's return type:

  - If the method returns a `boolean`, `byte`, `char`, `short`, or `int`, only the *ireturn* instruction may be used.
  - If the method returns a `float`, `long`, or `double`, only an *freturn*, *lreturn*, or *dreturn* instruction, respectively, may be used.
  - If the method returns a `reference` type, only an *areturn* instruction may be used, and the type of the returned value must be assignment compatible with the return descriptor of the method (JLS §5.2, [§4.3.3](#jvms-4.3.3)).
  - All instance initialization methods, class or interface initialization methods, and methods declared to return `void` must use only the *return* instruction.

- The type of every class instance accessed by a *getfield* instruction or modified by a *putfield* instruction must be assignment compatible with the class type specified in the instruction (JLS §5.2).

- The type of every value stored by a *putfield* or *putstatic* instruction must be compatible with the descriptor of the field ([§4.3.2](#jvms-4.3.2)) of the class instance or class being stored into:

  - If the descriptor type is `boolean`, `byte`, `char`, `short`, or `int`, then the value must be an `int`.
  - If the descriptor type is `float`, `long`, or `double`, then the value must be a `float`, `long`, or `double`, respectively.
  - If the descriptor type is a `reference` type, then the value must be of a type that is assignment compatible with the descriptor type (JLS §5.2).

- The type of every value stored into an array by an *aastore* instruction must be a `reference` type.

  The component type of the array being stored into by the *aastore* instruction must also be a `reference` type.

- Each *athrow* instruction must throw only values that are instances of class `Throwable` or of subclasses of `Throwable`.

  Each class mentioned in a `catch_type` item of the `exception_table` array of the method's `Code_attribute` structure must be `Throwable` or a subclass of `Throwable`.

- If *getfield* or *putfield* is used to access a `protected` field declared in a superclass that is a member of a different run-time package than the current class, then the type of the class instance being accessed must be the same as or a subclass of the current class.

  If *invokevirtual* or *invokespecial* is used to access a `protected` method declared in a superclass that is a member of a different run-time package than the current class, then the type of the class instance being accessed must be the same as or a subclass of the current class.

- Execution never falls off the bottom of the `code` array.

- No return address (a value of type `returnAddress`) may be loaded from a local variable.

- The instruction following each *jsr* or *jsr_w* instruction may be returned to only by a single *ret* instruction.

- No *jsr* or *jsr_w* instruction that is returned to may be used to recursively call a subroutine if that subroutine is already present in the subroutine call chain. (Subroutines can be nested when using `try`-`finally` constructs from within a `finally` clause.)

- Each instance of type `returnAddress` can be returned to at most once.

  If a *ret* instruction returns to a point in the subroutine call chain above the *ret* instruction corresponding to a given instance of type `returnAddress`, then that instance can never be used as a return address.











